Figure 6.18: Regional map showing weighted path networks, EB I sites (sized), results of
XTENT analysis, and catchment analysis results for EEBI minimum population maximum grazing extents largest footprints scenario. Light green indicates land desired for use by one settlement. Dark green indicates land desired for use by 2 settlements. Red and Yellow indicate
several sites desiring the same land.

351

Figure 6.19: Regional map showing weighted path networks, EB I sites (sized), results of
XTENT analysis, and catchment analysis results for EEBI maximum population maximum crop
extents largest footprints scenario. Light green indicates land desired for use by one settlement.
Dark green indicates land desired for use by 2 settlements. Red and Yellow indicate several sites
desiring the same land.

352

6.6

Applying Networks to Shuna
“Site catchment analysis probably gives us a good rough sketch of the resources within walking distance of a village. What it does not give us is a
sketch of the network of interrelationships by which those resources were
manipulated.”
– Rossmann 1976, 103

The results of the network analysis can be applied to some of the results presented
in Chapter 5, where several different landuse scenarios were presented. In particular, the larger population levels for EEBI and LEBI Shuna will benefit because of the
potentially large amounts of land required, and the potential for competition from
neighbouring sites for land. For example, as shown in Figure 5.100 on page 249, which
depicts the catchments calculated for EEBI Maximum Population (3000), Meat 30%,
the footprints are very large, and very variable depending on the dairy utilisation and
animal foddering factors.
Once the regional path network has been established, and subsistence landuse
catchments have been generated for each site in the network, it is possible to do much
deeper analysis considering the subsistence needs of (and potential production of) each
site in the network. Given the massive amounts of data required to properly set up each
of the EBA I sites in the southern Levant (from data from the palaeobotanical and faunal records) for LA to perform the modelling in a robust fashion, the huge amount
of computational time required, plus the time constraints placed on this research, it
has not been possible to take this analysis beyond the point to which it has been presented. Further discussion of the potential of regional route networks in conjunction
with subsistence landuse catchment is discussed in the following (final) chapter of this
thesis.
Because there was a suspected subsistence strategy change from the EEBI to the
LEBI the early EB I diet has been used here to see if the subsistence strategies linked to
an EEBI diet could support higher population levels seen in the LEBI.
As evident in 6.16, which illustrates minimum population estimates and subsistence
strategy scenario producing maximum cropland requirements there is little overlap and
there should be no problems maintaining this population with this scenario. Taking
the population level to a higher level however results in a much different picture as
evident in 6.17. Here we see the entire Jordan valley dedicated to cultivation and crop
production. Even when looking at the maximum population with a subsistence strategy
known to produce a minimum area of cropland requirement as in 6.17the majority of
the arable land in the Jordan valley is being intensively cultivated.
Minimum populations and a subsistence strategy which produces the smallest cropland requirements as in Figure 6.16 shows very little overlap suggesting that this combi353

nation of population and subsistence strategies could have been successfully employed.
Once grazing land requirements are considered in this regional view it becomes clear
how much of the region was required for food production to sustain the growing population. Looking at Figure 6.19 in particular there is very little room for expansion
therefore subsistence strategy change would be required in order for population levels to increase much beyond this level. Again looking at the minimum population the
subsistence strategies which produce the smallest footprints (e.g. Figures 6.14 to 6.15)
suggest there would have been ample room for expansion for agricultural lands to accommodate and increasing population without having to change subsistence strategies.
One other aspect visibly apparent from these regional maps is that land used for
grazing in the lower population scenarios would have had to been converted to use as
cropland as population levels increased. If this were to happen simultaneously to settlements near each other, there would be potential for increased conflict over landuse;
because grazing land is less intensively used in comparison to cultivated cropland there
is less visible signs of control / ownership than there would be with cultivated land thus
if one settlement began cultivating land that previously another site had used for grazing it would be immediately apparent and arrangements/agreements would have been
necessary to avoid conflict.
As populations grew and the amount of cultivated land continued to expand outwards from the settlements fewer choices would have been available to the shepherds
for grazing their herds. This could have negative consequences if the variety of ecological zones in their grazing range was reduced as it would have increased vulnerability
to fluctuations in weather patterns. Restricted access to grazing lands could have triggered an increased reliance on the use of fodder to lessen the vulnerabilities associated
with access to fewer ecological zones. Another effect of large populations using an
EEBI subsistence strategy is that grazing lands are becoming increasingly distant in
some cases reaching nearly 20 kms which is a substantial distance to move a herd. By
the time the overlapping grazing land is relocated to areas which are not being used
for either grazing or under-cultivation by other settlements the potential for population
increases was essentially limited to this level.
Because grazing land requires no human input for use, and is only ever used when
there is grass available for the animals to eat, grazing areas would have a low and
ephemeral human presence in comparison to land which is under cultivation. Taking
this into account and also considering that grazing lands are located further away from
the security of the settlement and its associated busy cropland, it is the grazing lands
which would be easiest for other settlements to encroach upon. People could not lightly
crop another settlements cultivated land without being discovered. It would be possible
however to lightly graze another settlements distant grazing lands without it being
discovered. Cultivated land is obvious grazing land is not. The mere fact that the land
354

is cultivated gives a powerful image of ownership and control of that land.
As populations increased the ‘obvious’ cropland would have been much less likely
to be a source of ongoing conflict in comparison to the more distant less intensively
used grazing lands. In particular during times of drought scenarios such as those represented in 6.17 would almost certainly resulted in many problems in this regard. To
lessen the problems associated with subsistence strategies that require large amounts of
cultivated land and extensive grazing lands subsistence strategies could be adjusted, as
was illustrated throughout Chapter 5. Changes, such as an increased use of dairy products, the foddering of animals to reduce grazing land requirements and less meat in the
diet, (as is suggested by the LEBI archaeological evidence at Shuna see Figure 5.10 on
page 131) would have accommodated higher populations than the early EB I scenarios
used in this chapter.
The clustering of large sites would not be problematic if there was no environmental problems like drought because as discussed above the land under cultivation would
have had to have been in use under arrangement. It does mean however, that the
majority of land in and around the settlements was increasingly dedicated to use as
crop land as population levels increased. Once all of the available land was in use as
crop land (which seems to be the case in the Jordan valley given the scenarios shown
6.17 for example) it would seem likely that these communities would have benefited
from some kind of arrangement with settlements outside of the crop catchment areas
required by these large settlements; thus, it would be unsurprising to see many smaller
sites in areas less amenable to agriculture that could provide the animal products that
the larger centres have become less able to produce themselves. This tendency is apparent in these maps, which lends support to this possibility.
It is easy to imagine grazing areas becoming more distant from the settlement as
a result of increasing cultivation, with shepherds taking their families with them into
these distant areas and establishing a small settlement. This strategy would have made
it easier for them to make their living, while reinforcing their control/ownership of the
area with their increased presence. This could have been a development of convenience
and could easily have developed into a system which some might recognise as being
urban.
As croplands were expanding, and before the majority of arable land was being
cultivated prospective cropland in use by shepherds for grazing would have been more
important to maintain control/ownership over than areas which were less suitable for
agricultural use. One might expect therefore to see indications of people attempting to
mark these areas in such a way that they would have been clearly identified as belonging to them. A small settlement would be a good way of doing this as it not only does
this by a physical structure but also a human presence. If the cropland continued to
expand to accommodate the increasing population and these small settlements became
355

surrounded by the cropland (pushing grazing land further away) it would again have
been beneficial to leave that settlement and start a new one in the now more distant
grazing area for the same reasons as before. This might in part explain why the Early
Bronze Age saw a cycle of settlements appearing and subsequently being abandoned.
Especially in areas where cropland supplying the larger settlements were in proximity to each other it is reasonable to think that these areas would have made more
effort to clearly mark their territories and field boundaries, terraces etc. might have
been important. The route network is much more complex and dense in areas of which
are under intensive agricultural use, clearly they are more complex simply because of
the number of sites but it is clear from the maps that the majority of these sites creating
this increased complexity are small, with most being under 1 hectare in size.
The limitations of XTENT modelling (and other models that use fixed behavioural
assumptions) becomes evident now that such a vast range of catchment areas has
been shown possible for any individual site; the estimated size/population of a site
has clearly been shown to not be the only influencing factor with respect to the size of
a site’s area. Unlike EXTENT, Landuse Analyst directly attempts to engage with the data
more openly and inductively by actively exploring multiple assumptions. In the future,
it will be very interesting to try and incorporate the strengths of other methodologies
into Landuse Analyst (see Sections 3.4.1 on page 46 and 7.1 on page 364).
It is interesting to note that there appears to be more small sites in the Jordan
valley clustered around large sites than elsewhere in the region. This could be due to
the geographical constraints of the valley and the river limiting access to the growing
need for arable land. It is interesting to see that there appears to be more medium
sized sites clustered around the large sites in the west than there are in the Jordan
valley where we see a lot more small sites clustered around the medium to large sites.
To the east of the Jordan river it appears there would be less potential for conflict and
competition for land, but this could be a result of the natural boundary formed by the
Jordan River or due to the abrupt change in landscape experienced east of the Jordan
valley. Additionally, it could be partly attributed to the fact that, in this preliminary
regional study, it has not been possible to include all of the sites east of the Jordan
valley due to lack of data. These issues mean that this observation is made with a
certain degree of caution. Similar observations are noticeable however, in the region
to the south and west of Lake Tiberias.
To conclude, an examination of these scenarios at this regional level would seem
to suggest that the subsistence strategies suggested from an early EB I diet which was
arguably more dependent on primary animal products would not have been sustainable
with a high population. I am suggesting therefore that because population levels did
increase a subsistence strategy change would have been necessary.
The following final chapter of this thesis discusses how this research has addressed
356

the research questions posed in Chapter One. Additionally, it presents the future potential development of this work, not only in relation to the analysis presented in Chapters
5 and 6, but also for additional applications and enhancements to the methodology
(and Landuse Analyst in particular).

357

358

Chapter 7

Conclusions
7.1

Introduction

This thesis has demonstrated a method of systematic analysis designed to calculate
the extent and approximate location of subsistence catchment areas for settlements
of the prehistoric southern Levant. The methodology which has been used to model
subsistence catchment areas has been based solidly on archaeological data, and further enhanced with the incorporation of the physiological characteristics of the plants
and animals found in the palaeobotanical and faunal assemblage as well as by the use
of both modern and palaeoenvironmental factors. A systematic analysis using many
different combinations of input factors (for example, using a range of values for population, crop yield estimates, contribution of dairy products to the diet and so on) has
shown that significant differences in landscape engagement result.
In the introduction to this thesis I proposed several research questions that might
provide insight into the phenomena seen in the Early Bronze Age, particularly the
appearance of an increased density of large and small settlements in the fourth millennium BC.
If we understand urban communities as (at least partly) requiring access to resources to sustain them beyond those afforded by their immediate hinterland,
then insight into the above question of whether these Early Bronze Age communities could be sustained by their immediately adjacent local landscape will
surely be a valuable contribution to this debate.
Questions:
Did Early Bronze Age communities outgrow the capacity of the immediately
adjacent local landscape to support themselves, and what sort of impact on the
landscape can we understand such communities to have had?
Can an empirically rigorous argument be made that, contrary to the main
trend in scholarly literature on the Early Bronze Age over the past 15 years,
land-pressures under conditions of population growth in the EBA favoured the
development of regional site dependencies, exchange networks and perhaps also
settlement hierarchies?

Two approaches can be adopted to defining immediately adjacent local landscapes.
359

One approach is traditional within geography and employs concepts of travel time to
exploit fields by farming communities. The local landscape is then defined as the land
that can be exploited within one days return journey, typically 5 kms, as classically
utilised in preliminary site catchment analyses. As a basis for catchment analysis this
approach has been seen to be flawed as discussed in Chapter 3.
In particular it has been suggested that this imposes a modern western economic
viewpoint on the landscape. However, in practice many communities that do not exhibit such ergonomic conceptual frameworks nevertheless operate within such constraints and its is therefore convenient to address this question in reference to such a
framework. Using this criterion Shuna, for example, would almost certainly not have
required crop land beyond these limits and in that sense had not outgrown the capacity
of the local environment to sustain itself. This approach would conclude that Shuna
would most likely not be an appropriate representation of an urban settlement.
A second approach, however, is to understand whether enough land would have
been available around sites like Shuna given the demands of the wider settlement
world and especially adjacent settlements. In this regard under a number of scenarios
there would have been considerable problems for a community like Shuna to meet
crop needs from the local landscape and it is plausible other communities grew food
made available to at least some at sites like Shuna through exchange or ‘taxation’.
From this angle, it does seem likely that the sustaining areas of adjacent sites would
have impinged upon that of Shuna. As a result, it may have been difficult for Shuna
to support itself without acting in some way as an urban centre with regards to these
other settlements. Conversely, if approached from the opposite angle looking first at the
smaller settlements, would it have been feasible for them to have had their subsistence
catchment area completely engulfed by a much larger settlement without this type of
relationship?
As stated earlier, the conversion of huge areas of land to cultivation must have
occurred to sustain the increasing population. I feel that it has been demonstrated that
at a minimum, changes in agricultural strategies had to have occurred to support the
populations witnessed in the EBA. At the very least, production levels of food had to
increase in response to population increases. While clearing of land for use as cultivated
cropland was certainly not new, the scale at which it must have occurred in the EBA
was.
As a result of the regional analysis done in Chapter 6, it is, I believe, quite reasonable to consider the possibility that, as the landscape surrounding settlements became
more devoted to the production of cultivated lands (resulting in more distant pastures),
these outlying areas could have been places where people involved with the rearing of
animals might have moved to on a possibly permanent basis.
Whilst this move may have been one of convenience, it could be interpreted as the
360

beginnings of a form of urbanism. With higher populations came the need for more
food. An examination of just one community, as was done with Shuna in Chapter 5,
shows that it is possible to sustain any population with any of the scenarios entered
into the model. When viewed regionally, however, it has been shown that access to a
sufficient area of suitable land becomes a limiting factor. I believe that a better way
to approach this question is to ask if communities outgrew the production potential of
their subsistence strategy given the area of suitable land to which they had access.
The mere presence of smaller sites within even what has been shown to be the
smallest possible crop land extents (e.g. Figure 6.12 page 345) argues for a more
complex asymmetric relationship between these communities that are at the heart of
some understandings of urbanism. If considered in the context of higher populations
and other modelled scenarios, it becomes even more evident that these relationships
must have existed. Although Chesson and Philip argue against urbanism in favour of
their corporate village model, I feel that, at least in part, they fail to consider some of
these types of relationships that are urban in nature, even if they are not exactly like
the form of urbanism we see in Mesopotamia.
Not only has the the scale of the settlement been demonstrated as being an important factor for assessing landscape engagement, but it has also been demonstrated
how valuable it is to consider the wider region when assessing the feasibility of proposed land use resulting from various subsistence strategies. The modelling software
proved useful in that it has provided a way to quickly and systematically examine so
many scenarios. Chapter 6 has indicated that certain areas, such as the Jordan Valley, were likely to have had to have close ties to neighbouring communities, especially
as populations continued to climb and the need for cultivated land increased. It has
also shown an interesting trend for small sites to be surrounded by the cropland of the
larger settlements. Given the coarse temporal resolution available to us, the fact that
these small sites appear to lie within crop land extents might mean that they were in
their community’s grazing land extent when first established.
Questions:
Is it possible to find evidence to support the proposition that agricultural intensification must have been associated with the development of the new larger
scale of EBA communities?
Can we find evidence that, as Philip (2003) and Chesson (2003) put it, such
communities ‘inscribed’ themselves on their landscape in new ways, and are
these communities likely to have been some of the first to have had a significant negative impact on their physical environment?

By examining a large number of different scenarios, it has been shown that certain
strategies appear more favourable than others depending in part on circumstance. For
example, the suspected ‘meatier’ diet of the Chalcolithic was observed to be sufficient
only up to a certain population level, at which point a change of subsistence strategy
361

