beginnings of a form of urbanism. With higher populations came the need for more
food. An examination of just one community, as was done with Shuna in Chapter 5,
shows that it is possible to sustain any population with any of the scenarios entered
into the model. When viewed regionally, however, it has been shown that access to a
sufficient area of suitable land becomes a limiting factor. I believe that a better way
to approach this question is to ask if communities outgrew the production potential of
their subsistence strategy given the area of suitable land to which they had access.
The mere presence of smaller sites within even what has been shown to be the
smallest possible crop land extents (e.g. Figure 6.12 page 345) argues for a more
complex asymmetric relationship between these communities that are at the heart of
some understandings of urbanism. If considered in the context of higher populations
and other modelled scenarios, it becomes even more evident that these relationships
must have existed. Although Chesson and Philip argue against urbanism in favour of
their corporate village model, I feel that, at least in part, they fail to consider some of
these types of relationships that are urban in nature, even if they are not exactly like
the form of urbanism we see in Mesopotamia.
Not only has the the scale of the settlement been demonstrated as being an important factor for assessing landscape engagement, but it has also been demonstrated
how valuable it is to consider the wider region when assessing the feasibility of proposed land use resulting from various subsistence strategies. The modelling software
proved useful in that it has provided a way to quickly and systematically examine so
many scenarios. Chapter 6 has indicated that certain areas, such as the Jordan Valley, were likely to have had to have close ties to neighbouring communities, especially
as populations continued to climb and the need for cultivated land increased. It has
also shown an interesting trend for small sites to be surrounded by the cropland of the
larger settlements. Given the coarse temporal resolution available to us, the fact that
these small sites appear to lie within crop land extents might mean that they were in
their community’s grazing land extent when first established.
Questions:
Is it possible to find evidence to support the proposition that agricultural intensification must have been associated with the development of the new larger
scale of EBA communities?
Can we find evidence that, as Philip (2003) and Chesson (2003) put it, such
communities ‘inscribed’ themselves on their landscape in new ways, and are
these communities likely to have been some of the first to have had a significant negative impact on their physical environment?

By examining a large number of different scenarios, it has been shown that certain
strategies appear more favourable than others depending in part on circumstance. For
example, the suspected ‘meatier’ diet of the Chalcolithic was observed to be sufficient
only up to a certain population level, at which point a change of subsistence strategy
361

appears to be needed if population levels were to continue to climb. Because populations are based on a combined use of site size and population density estimates, it is
necessary to talk in terms of population density estimates, as the site sizes are calculated from the archaeological evidence, whilst the human population density can only
be estimated. Therefore, given that we have an idea of what the settlement sizes were
during the various phases of occupation, maximum and minimum populations should
be used. That being said, as time progressed from the EEBI, settlement sizes could be
seen to increase, and even using minimum values for population density, population
levels corresponding to the site sizes were shown to be problematic under certain subsistence strategies. I suspect that changes in subsistence strategies would have been
slow to change until/unless something occurred which made it a necessity. Simply
expanding your territory using the same strategy would have worked to a point, but
eventually this expansion reaches a limit, forcing something to change. This limit to
expansion can be from any number of things, such as natural barriers like river or large
bodies of water, changing ecological zones, or competition for land from neighbouring
communities. When these limits were reached, a more efficient use of the available
land was likely to have had to occur if population levels were seen to have increased.
This was shown to be possible throughout the course of Chapter 5, and is supported
by the archaeological evidence (e.g. the increasing proportions of cattle perhaps indicating greater ploughing at Shuna, or the ‘disappearance’ of pigs perhaps being an
indication for the intentional drainage of bottom lands, and so on).
With cultivation being a very visible inscription on the landscape already, I propose
that other more deliberate attempts to indicate an association of communities to their
more distant grazing lands could have been made. Although my research has not been
able to explore these issues directly, it seems reasonable that one might find features
such as dolmens in these areas, deliberately placed to ensure that the land was in use
by them. In addition the packing of landscapes like the Jordan valley with the fields,
fallow as well as cultivated, of significant number of adjacent communities seems likely
to have demanded systems of the signalling of land ownership more clearly than in the
past.
On this basis one suspects visible land boundaries would have been a prominent
feature of such densely utilised ares of landscape as the Jordan valley and Jezreel.
Likewise long term investment in increasing areas of olive and vine cultivation in the
surrounding hills were likely marked by field boundaries and terracing. One is even
tempted to imagine the appearance of a classically Mediterranean landscape for the
first time in the fourth millennium BC.
As stated above, when a current subsistence strategy had consumed all available
suitable land, something had to change, and it has been shown throughout the course of
this thesis that this could very well have been a change to the diet/subsistence strategy.
362

Questions:
How did such relatively large communities sustain themselves within the environments in which they operated?
What sorts of land use can we interpret from the available data on subsistence practices combined with environmental evidence and our understanding
of their landscapes?
If we can ascertain the types of land use, what scale of activity relating to
the associated land use can we understand to have operated in these circumstances?

After examining a large number of scenarios using set combinations of values for input
data that had a range of acceptable values, it has become evident that studies of this
nature on settlements in isolation are incomplete; only by examining land use on a
regional scale can we begin to understand how subsistence strategies can be linked to
environmental evidence, and begin to more fully understand the ancient landscape.
Land use requirements suggest extensive arable land was needed for large settlements,
often focused largely on alluvial, low lying areas with pasture ‘forced’ into the hills, but
was likely managed around the important ‘cash’ crops like olive and viticulture (‘olive
culture’ was probably practised by Shuna’s inhabitants, as indicated by the significant
amounts of olive wood amongst the Shuna charcoals.). My dynamic model for caprine
and cattle herd management indicates very significant opportunities for dairying, even
without a strong ‘dairy’ signature in the faunal remains.
It has become clear that as populations grew regionally, so too did the likelihood
for increased impact of these communities on their landscapes. Both the specific Shuna
case study and the more generalised ‘network’ analysis indicate that even at minimum
likely population levels, very extensive tracts of the Jordan and Jezreel valleys and
adjacent hills were under cultivation and subject to regular grazing pressure.
The proposed impacts are supported by the limited and low resolution palynological
work from the Huleh (Wilkinson 2003, 26-27) that show an increase in olive pollen
in the EBA. At least in certain areas, like in the Jordan valley, the implications are
that there almost certainly had to have been a major impact on the shaping of the
landscape and on natural processes within the landscape. Given the limited scope of
analysis possible in this thesis, statements like this remain general on the whole, but
certainly, for this specific area, this is a precise consequence of the diets, subsistence
strategies and populations that have being modelled.
Because it has been shown that there was this high likelihood for such intensive use
of and modification to the landscape, future development of this work will benefit from
the contributions of studies dealing with some wider issues that have been raised about
soil erosion, land nutrient depletion, deforestation, and so on (e.g. Wilkinson et al.
2007, Wilkinson 2003, Henkin et al. 2005, Blumler 1993, Fall et al. 2002, Seligman
1996).
363

Even a quick, casual glance at the outcome of the regional analysis done in Chapter
6 makes it obvious that these communities must have had a major impact, for example, on the natural vegetation of the area. Grazing would have affected vegetation,
the woodland in the hills would have been affected by the clearance, and the wetland
areas in the valley must have also been affected. Even when looking at scenarios which
indicated the smallest areas of required cropland, on a regional scale this would have
required huge amounts of land to be cleared and put under cultivation. These unprecedented changes to the landscape must have presented these ancient communities with
many new problems with which they would have had to learn to deal with for the first
time.
Certainly, given the scale of cultivation alone, there would have been potential for
massive impact on the land. If people responded to any of the new challenges resulting
from these changes in the wrong way, there most certainly is the possibility that it could
have had very negative effects on their surrounding environment.
The use of site catchment analysis helps address several of these questions, but
previous ‘site catchment’ studies have generally only focussed on individual
settlements; however, settlements and communities exist in networks. In particular, one of the notable features of the Early Bronze settlement record is the
obvious existence of networks of communities, especially in the larger communities (Philip 2001, 207).
Question:
What can a combined study of land use and routes connecting a network of settlements allow us to understand about relationships between settlements and
the nature of such networks?

The development of Landuse Analyst has proven to be a very efficient and useful way
to utilise as many input factors as possible in a land use model. Although it took a
huge amount of time to design and create, the payoff has been worthwhile; it is now
possible to very quickly explore any conceivable number of combinations of factors in
a very short amount of time, and provides a tool which will provide a systematic way
of comparing results across a wide range of archaeological scenarios.
Although somewhat preliminary in nature, Chapter Six has shown that Landuse
Analyst can effectively be employed together with other GIS techniques to offer insights
into landscape use not possible in the past. The analysis done in this research really
only scratches the surface of insights which this kind of work can yield.
As discussed in Section 3.4.1 on page 46, the methodology and software presented
in this thesis could be a valuable addition for many different projects. The future combination of Landuse Analyst7.1 , settlement land use modelling and regional network
analysis will prove exciting indeed in a multitude of applications.
7.1

also combined with the fact that continually faster hardware will allow for increased resolutions of
input data

364

7.2

Methodological Development and Future Work

Developing a methodology for use in this thesis resulted in the creation of Landuse
Analyst, a tool which has the capacity to provide a large number of different avenues
for future research.
There is a wealth of information provided by Landuse Analyst that I have not been
able to touch upon in this thesis. For example, as a result of the herd re-constructions,
the number of adult females, males, newborns and juveniles is calculated. These estimates could be used to provide further insights into the relationships between the
animals and the inhabitants of the settlement. For example (using conceptual numbers), if the settlement being modelled had a population of 3000 people and a total
cattle herd of 750 adults, it could suggest that every 4 people had one cow, or if one
were to estimate a household family size at eight persons, 2 cows per family. One could
also approach this from other angles, such as using ethnographic studies to determine
how many cows one shepherd (or a family unit) could manage. If that number was
15 (again, conceptual numbers for illustrative purposes only), then 50 shepherds (or
50 family units) could have looked after the cattle, leaving 2600 people (or 325 families) to deal with the goats, sheep, crops, pot making, and so forth. Reconstructing
animal management strategies like this could allow for a more sophisticated analysis
of landuse, whereby one might examine on a local level strategies which could have
been employed for the sharing of grazing land. This could be put into a more temporal
perspective as well, taking into account when animals would have been wanted for use
in the fields as draught animals, or kept nearby to maximise the collection of milk for
the production of dairy products, in conjunction with the annual climatic cycle and the
various ecological zones available to them.
Increasing importance of route location has been linked to viticulture intensification (Gibson 2006, 78), which would be an interesting avenue to explore in a higher
resolution analysis. One of the issues raised is that leaking liquids or crushed fruit from
vine crops result in slippery trails, so careful clearing of routes was done as a way of
safeguarding the transport of this important produce. Even at this lower resolution, it
is interesting to see that the routes through hill-country, which is also the landscape
which is best suited for vine crops, tend to follow the wadi bottoms. This might be
problematic for transport of liquids, as vegetation can be dense in these areas. Routes
through the wadis therefore might have been cleared, and their constant use would
have resulted in hard packed soils. This, and the lack of vegetation on these trails
could have accelerated erosion, and resulted in the need for a constant changing of
route locations over time. This may have, at times, encouraged trade or exchange with
more distant communities which had less risky routes; likewise, it could also have just
resulted in a more difficult route to be used. To better investigate this type of route
365

placement in future studies, it would be beneficial to closely look at ground cover in
addition to topographical features to allow these factors to be taken into consideration.
Surplus potential can also be examined. Landuse Analyst can limit the amount of
dairy which contributes to the diet, and calculates any surplus. This data could be
used in conjunction with regional network studies exploring potential trade relations
between settlements, or to see if some settlements were better suited physiographically
to focus on the overproduction of certain commodities to keep other settlements (which
may have been less suited for the production of this product) supplied.
Landuse Analyst also calculates animal density, and could prove especially insightful
when looking at animals which could have provided traction. For example, is there any
evident change in the number of adult cattle when the area of cultivated land being
used increases? If there is, does it coincide with the use of the plough? If so, did this in
turn make the production of certain crops for use as fodder more feasible, thus lowering
the land requirements for grazing? As pointed out in Chapter 5, these relationships are
supported by the archaeological record at Shuna (Chapter 5, page 319). This recursive
relationship with the archaeological record means that it will be possible to address
some of the new questions arising from this type of analysis.
By changing the contributions of non-domestic food items in Landuse Analyst, it is
also possible to examine scenarios where people would have resorted to an increased
utilisation of these resources (e.g. fishing, hunting, collecting of other wild plants)
during times of stress (like drought or crop failure due to disease).
Clearly, the resolution of the geographical data used to classify land suitable for use
by the crops and animal herds can always be improved. The simple approach taken
in this thesis was to use only one classification factor (slope), but Landuse Analyst has
been specifically designed to use any combination of factors. Factors such as soil types,
rainfall patterns, more complex crop rotations, salinity problems and so on can be taken
into consideration when setting up the model.
Crops and animals can, on an individual basis, be given either sole access to, or
the first choice to access specific land, as well as to land deemed suitable for use by all
crops. Grazing of fallow land can be done in a more sophisticated manner as well. In
Chapter 5, where detailed analysis was done at Shuna, all animals were given equal
access to fallow land for grazing.
Landuse Analyst does provide an easy system for granting access to fallow land
for grazing to the animals using a three level access priority system, so that if one was
wishing to look at the use of grazing lands in more detail, this could be used to do do so
in a very detailed way. For example, if cattle were given first priority to all fallow land in
order to keep them close to the settlement for dairy production and traction purposes,
this might change the herding strategies used further out from the settlement.
The archaeological record can only provide us with clues as to what the crops being
366

grown were. By looking at remains which might represent several hundred years,
annual variations of sowing choices are impossible to know. Landuse Analyst provides
an easy way to explore if there is an effect from sowing crops in varying ratios. By
simply changing the contribution levels of an individual crop (or animal for that matter)
one can instantly see the results. If, for example, one wanted to see what might have
happened if people responded to dry conditions at the time of sowing by planting
more barley, this can easily be done. All of the potential effects, including foddering
animals, dairy production contributions, fallow grazing, etc, are instantly calculated.
The ability to explore these types of temporally high resolution scenarios could provide
interesting insights into how ancient peoples responded to different events especially
as the resolution of the palaeoenvironmental record continues to improve as does the
modelling of palaeoenvironments.
It also allows for an examination of whether temporary increases in production of
certain items could have been possible. For example, if one wanted to explore the situation where one settlement experienced a temporary food shortage due to localised
drought for example, it could be modelled by changing population levels. This would
be done by first noting the levels required and produced by the drought stricken settlement, and then cutting their population level according to the severity of the drought;
if for example, you wanted to simulate a 75% failure, and the settlement had a population of 1000 people, one could cut the population by 75%, and note the production
levels. This shortage could be added onto a neighbouring site by adding the population
cut from the drought stricken site to it’s own. By manipulating crop rotation values or
the ratios of the crops being sown, it is possible to look for a way in which this extra
production might have been incorporated into the agricultural land at the disposal of
the site providing the assistance. The effects of interrupting their normal cycle of crop
rotation could even be explored for the following year by lowering yields of the crops
to simulate the negative effect of sowing the fallow land to help out the neighbours.
By manipulating the values used to define the animals in Landuse Analyst, it is
possible to simulate the use breeding stock in animal herds for emergency food. For
example, one could increase the number of offspring per birthing event, while at the
same time lowering the size of the offspring at slaughter. To explain, it is necessary
to build a small scenario. Assume that an animal normally gives birth one baby a
year, and the weight at slaughter is 100 kg. If you wish to model the halving of the
breeding herd, you can give that animal two babies per year, and reduce the slaughter
weight to 50 kg. This will effectively halve the breeding herd size (thus halving the
potential dairy production levels as well). Further tweaks are possible as well, such
as adjustments to animal food requirements and so on that might be used to provide
increasingly sophisticated scenarios that might be wanted in order to simulate changes
to foddering strategies and so forth.
367

7.3

Concluding Remarks

I have demonstrated in this thesis a method of using palaeobotanical and faunal assemblages to help reconstruct potential subsistence strategies and land use models,
and provided a detailed implementation of this methodology at the south Levantine
site of Tel esh Shuna North in the Jordan Valley. The results of this analysis were further extended to incorporate 125 additional sites, providing a regional context which
allowed further observations and isights to be made. By focussing on the inclusion of
as much archaeological evidence as possible, the reconstructed environments which
emerge from this analysis avoid many of the problems associated with more theoretical
approaches. The ‘bottom-up’ approach taken in this research allows for a closer relationship to the archaeological material, facilitating the synthesis of diet, subsistence
strategies and land management techniques between many forms of archaeological evidence in a clear, systematic and replicable manner. By creating Landuse Analyst, (an
open source tool that is freely available to anyone, runs on any computer, and which
can be used for any time period at any location in the world), I have not only moved
beyond the usual restraints imposed by the use of proprietary software packages (e.g.
cost, data format, operating system requirements, and so on), but I have also avoided
the problem of developing a methodology specific to, and directly applicable to, only
the area of study in the topic of this research thus allowing future researchers to directly utilise these methods (via Landuse Analyst) into their own unique and specific
areas of interest.
In the introduction to this thesis I highlighted several questions related to settlement patterns of the early bronze age. Using the site of Shuna I have illustrated not
only how land use can vary depending upon the particular characteristics of a subsistence strategy according to variations in the diet, but also how these strategies would
likely have had to change over time to accommodate an increasing population. As
communities grow larger, the subsistence strategies, which are constrained to the environment in which they operated, had to change when/if this environment became fully
exploited. The size of a prehistoric settlement would also have affected its impact upon
the surrounding environment and resultantly the strategies used by people to modify
the landscape to suit their needs.
It has been shown in this thesis that by the EEBI, the southern Levant could have
indeed been confronted with this issue. If we look at the maximum (or even average)
scenarios, it actually seems quite likely that already by the EEBI these communities
would have had a pretty significant impact; the majority of the Jordan Valley has been
shown to have likely been nearly completely devoted to use as croplands, and it is
likely that significant areas adjacent to the valley would have been taken into fields and
terraces, coupled with large amounts of land which would have had to have been in use
368

as pasture. This all suggests that it seems extremely likely that these communities for
the first time had significantly altered their landscape and impacted their environment,
and thus, that they did in no small way inscribe themselves on their landscape.

369

370

Appendix A

Botanical Data
A.1

Shuna Botanical Data

The botanical remains in the following three tables was used to calculate the approximate contributions of the major components of the diet at Shuna. All three of the
charts have been reformatted by myself, but are drawn completely from the work of
Holden which is to be included in the forthcoming monograph on Shuna by Baird and
Philip.

371

Table A.1: CARBONISED PLANT REMAINS FROM ESH SHUNA - Chalcolithic

372

Latin Name

Plant Part

Common Name

Rumex cf. acetosella
Rumex sp.
cf. Rumex sp
cf. Polygonaceae
cf. Chenopodium sp.
Amaranthus sp.
Adonis sp.
Ranunculus sp.
Astragalus sp.
cf. Astragalus sp.
Vicia sp.
Vicia/Lathyrus sp.
Vicia/Lathyrus/Pisum sp.
Trifolieae, Medicago type
Trifolieae, Lotus/Trifolium type
cf. Trifolieae, Lotus/Trifolium type
Trifolieae, Trigonella type
Scorpiurus muricatus L.
Leguminosae indet.
Leguminosae indet (large seeded)
Leguminosae indet (small seeded)
Malva sp.
cf. Bupleurum sp.
Chrysanthemum sp.
Continued on Next Page. . .

nutlet
nutlet
nutlet
nutlet
nutlet
seed
achene
achene
seed
seed
seed
seed
seed
seed
seed
seed
seed
seed
seed
seed
seed
seed
fruit
achene

sheep’s sorrel
dock
dock
knotweed family
goosefoot, etc.
amaranth
pheasants eye
buttercup/crowfoot
vetch
vetch
vetch
vetch/tare/vetchling
vetch/tare/vetchling
medik
trefoil/clover
trefoil/clover

pea family
pea family
pea family
mallow

Count
1
1
1
2
1
1
10
1
2
2
1
13
1
6
61
2
10
290
13
21
2
2
1
2

