Walking Time Walking Time is the primary method used in this research for the
creation of cost surfaces used to define a catchment area. The anisotropic cost surface
that is generated for this method uses a DEM to calculate how long it would take to
walk from a starting point (the site, or ZERO on the cost surface) to all points on the
DEM. The cost surface can be given a maximum value in seconds (for example, to limit
the area to a five hour walk, a cost surface with values from 0 to 18,000 is used (See
Fig. 4.12).

Figure 4.12: Cost Surface generated by GRASS module r.walk (notice the effect rivers have)

To take into account the extra time required to cross rivers, and make areas such
as lakes impassable, an increase in the travel time on the cost surface must be made.
Although an approximation, assigning additional cost (in this case time) to rivers and
lakes can be useful for indicating preference of land choice. To do this, the river must
be digitized, and buffered wide enough to ensure continuity when converted to a raster.
It is critical that the river is continuous once in raster form (there are no breaks in the
cells defining the river). The river has a value of 1 at this point, and all other cells a
value of 0.
Increasing the value of the river to a higher value determines the time added for
crossing the river; the higher the value, the more time it adds. This value is dependent
on the topography, the width of the buffered area, and the increased value. For exam76

ple, in order to add an hour to the crossing time of the Jordan river, a 100 m buffer
was used, and a value of 100 was added. Next, a slope raster is created from an ASTER
DEM of the area surrounding the site. The river raster (with the increased value) is
added to the slope raster, and the result used as a friction map when creating the cost
surface. This gives results such as those seen in Figure 4.12 on page 76.
Path Distance

Path Distance is another anisotropic cost surface creation method that

looks at elevation data from a DEM and calculates distance from the site taking into
account the extra distances travelled going up or down slopes. The process is identical
to walking time, except that time is not a factor.

Figure 4.13: Path distance cost surface generated by GRASS module r.walk with λ = 0 (walking
features disabled)

77

Euclidean The Euclidean method ignores all topographic features of the landscape
when moving outwards from the site, creating an istropic cost surface; essentially we
are drawing concentric circles around the site. On this cost surface, all cells which the
circle passes through will have the same value. Put simply, if a circle is drawn on a
piece of graph paper, shade in every square that the line goes through. The result is a
cost surface with each step away from the site increasing equally by one regardless of
topography.

Figure 4.14: Euclidean cost surface generated by GRASS module r.cost with an input raster
which has every value equal to 1

4.2.5

Land Identification

In order to identify a particular area of classified, suitable land, a perimeter value, or
maximum extent of a cost surface, must be found, within which the area of suitable
land (that is almost certainly going to be comprised of multiple, irregularly shaped
polygons) satisfies the area target being looked for. Complicating this is the fact that
the irregularly shaped polygons from the land classification may be bisected by the
outer limit of the catchment area defined by this outer perimeter value.
78

Incremental method
To find the suitable land equal to the area target that is in closest proximity to the site,
a conditional loop is used which defines the outer extent of the catchment area, and
then calculates the area of suitable land contained within it. This process is identical
for all analysis methods. Early attempts started at the closest point to the site that
could potentially solve the problem 4.13 , and then moved steadily outwards until the
area target was found.
The amount to move outward in each step was an input variable, and might have
been a value like 30 (which in the case of walking distance means 30 seconds. On a
cost surface ranging from 0 to 20,000 this meant that potentially, there would have to
be 20,000
30 or nearly 7000 iterations in the search.) The steps involved were:
1. Set the initial boundary at which to start the analysis
2. Calculate the area of suitable land found within this boundary
3. If the area of land required has been satisfied, write the results to a new file for
that item and exit the loop
4. Increase the value of the analysis boundary
5. Repeat the loop (starting at Step 2)
This method proved extremely time consuming; if even 3,500 iterations (about half
of the conceptual cost surface map) was required, and each loop took as little as 45
seconds, the computation time would be nearly 44 hours. Multiply this, then, by the
number of individual crops and animals in the model and the run time suddenly needed
to be expressed in days or weeks.
Binary method
To increase the efficiency and reduce run times, a modified binary search algorithm
is used. This involves a somewhat different approach than the incremental method;
instead of using a step value, a percentage value is used. This percentage value is
called the Precision.
The area of land deemed by LA as equalling the current area target gets changed
into a target range ± the precision value multiplied by the target area. If a value of 5%

is entered, and the area target is 100 hectares, LA accepts 100 ± ( 100·5%
) (which is 97.5
2
to 102.5 hectares) as the target area.

The loop uses three terms, CurrentM idV alue F irstV alue and LastV alue. At the
beginning of the process, F irstV alue = 0 and LastV alue = 18, 000 which coincides
4.13

The closest point, or minimum radius, is a perfect circle equal in area to the target.

79

with the full extent of the cost surface. CurrentM idV alue is calculated within the
loop. The loop works like this:
alue
1. Set the analysis boundary: CurrentM idV alue = F irstV alue+LastV
.
2

2. Calculate the area of suitable land found within the boundary whose outermost
boundary is CurrentM idV alue
3. If the contained area falls within the target range, write the results to a new file
and exit the loop
4. If the contained area is more than the maximum value in the target range, set
a halfway between F irstV alue and CurrentM idV alue. This is done by making
LastV alue = CurrentM idV alue and then returning back to step number one.
(Note F irstV alue remains unchanged.)
5. If the contained area is less than the minimum value in the target range, set a
halfway between LastV alue and CurrentM idV alue. This is done by making
F irstV alue = CurrentM idV alue and then returning back to step number one.
(Note LastV alue remains unchanged.)
By using this method, the maximum number of iterations in the loop for the same
conceptual cost surface is only 17. This method of searching for the area targets makes
a huge difference efficiency and run times. A typical run is now ≈ 2 to 3 minutes,
compared to days and weeks using the incremental method. This allows for a fast
systematic examination of the many different permutations of an entire model on even
average computer systems.

4.3

Landuse Analyst

Early attempts at consolidation of the modelling process involved a compilation of
scripts written in BASH4.14 , but after the incorporation of the many factors (such as
different crops and animals, fallow, fallow grazing, etc), it was evident that a script
was not going to be ideal; the complexity of the animal and crop modelling in particular made using the scripts both slow and awkward. While the scripting approach
worked well for a proof of concept, a full implementation of all desired factors would
include a large number of hard coded variables and complicated, difficult to modify
code requiring changes for each scenario. This did not provide a flexible environment
for experimentation.
Consultation with developers of other modelling software led to the decision to
create an application in the programming language C++. Alongside the C++, it was
4.14

BASH is a UNIX scripting language

80

possible to implement TrollTech’s Qt libraries4.15 to create a user friendly GUI4.16 . This
research analyzes multiple sites, so software flexible enough to use without modification would be very advantageous. This wad accomplished by allowing all of the
influencing factors examined to be entered as input variables. Each crop grown, each
type of animal raised, along with the settlement characteristics needed to be defined
with a common set of variables. The result of this approach is a software application
that works in any part of the world, and for any post-agriculture period4.17 .
What began as a small script grew into a very flexible, user friendly application that
can be used not only for the research presented in this thesis, but by any archaeologist,
studying any time period, for any type of crop or animal, in any area of the world. I
have called this software Landuse Analyst (Figure 4.15).
c
Landuse Analyst�
(LA) has been written to be a cross-platform4.18 FOSS (Free Open

Source Software) application licensed under the GPL license4.19 It is released under this
license because it incorporates code from other applications which are also licensed this
way (GRASS, Open Modeler, etc)4.20 .
LA fully implements all aspects of the methodology described in Section 4.2 and is
presented in detail in the remainder of this chapter. Each distinct part of the software
has it’s own section, complete with screenshots. The source code for LA is in Appendix
D beginning on page 389.
In addition to archaeological data, diet variables and physiological characteristics,
LA requires geographical input. The software does not deal directly with the creation
of this information, which must be done using GRASS, but when run from within a
GRASS shell, it can directly work with data that has been previously prepared. Of
primary importance are the DEM and the land suitability (classification) masks.
Land suitability raster masks
The land suitability masks must be binary rasters, meaning that the cells of the raster
file only contain 0 or 1 (NULL values are currently not supported). The land that is
deemed suitable for use should be set to a value of 1, and the rest of the land is set to
0. This binary raster can then be multiplied by a selection layer (as created by either
Walking Distance, Path Distance, or Euclidean methods). This selection layer (also a
binary raster) grows in size until enough area is found within it’s bounds - identifying
the land to be analysed.
4.15

http://www.trolltech.com
Graphical User Interface
4.17
The input variables can even be adjusted in such a way that it could be used for pre-agriculture
periods as well.
4.18
Runs on Linux, Unix, Mac and Windows Computers
4.19
this license guarantees that Landuse Analyst will remain free, with the source code available to
anyone wishing to make enhancements and/or modifications.
4.20
The source code is hosted at http://code.google.com/p/landuseanalyst and is freely available for
download.
4.16

81

LA gives the option of using three different methods for landuse classification:
1. Use only the user supplied classification map (a binary mask) which can be based
on any number of factors, including but not limited to rainfall, soil type, geology,
elevation, ground cover and modern landuse.
2. Use minimum and maximum slope values to create a classification map which will
be used exclusively. This can also be done for common crop land and common
grazing land independently. For example, it is possible to stipulate 0◦ ≤ m ≤ 9◦
for crops and 9◦ < m ≤ 15◦ for grazing land, where m = slope.

3. Use a combination of the two classification maps above. Slope can be chosen to
either add to or subtract from the user supplied map, or alternatively, the user
supplied map can either add to or subtract from the slope map. This combination of the two can be very useful if, for example, a user wishes to use a soil
classification map as the primary indication of landuse suitability, but refine that
map by taking out the land they consider too steep for use. In this case the program generated slope masks would be subtracted from the user supplied (soil)
classification map.
Land Re-designation
Another notable feature of LA is land re-designation. Land that is suitable for the
production of crops is almost certainly suitable for grazing as well. For this reason, LA
finds all of the cropland first. Once the area targets for all crops have been satisfied,
land classified for use by crops that was not needed is re-designated as being suitable
for common grazing land and added to the land already designated as being suitable
for grazing.

82

One challenging aspect of the methodology to incorporate into the model was the
animal modelling. Animals are difficult to calculate area targets for because their land
requirements are largely based on their numbers, and a herd of adult females large
enough to sustain a steady supply of offspring with numbers enough to keep the production targets met has to be added into the equation as well. In addition, animals can
graze fallow crop land, eat fodder from the crops being grown, and graze other types
of land. LA takes these interactions into account in its computations. Herd Size determination is one of the most complicated algorithms (See Section 4.2.3, page 68) that
LA uses. Further complicating the issue, not all land that can be grazed has the same
food value to the animals. LA address these issues as well. Landuse Analyst requires a
complete definition of all of the crops and animals that a settlement used including (for
animals) information relating to their dietary requirements, their reproduction cycle,
and their grazing preferences4.21 .

4.3.1

LA’s Opening Screen

c
Figure 4.15: The main screen in Landuse Analyst�
where the user enters the basic site details,
modelling method, and GIS information

4.21

Interesting work was done on herd modelling by Cribb (1984, 1987) and he is now considered by
many to have been much ahead of his time.

83

Basic Input
The opening screen in LA allows basic details for the site being modeled to be entered.
Input boxes for the name, period, population and geographical co-ordinates of the site
are located on this screen in the ‘Settlement Information’ section.
Catchment creation methods
Also selected from this screen is the Modelling Method. LA can use three different
methods of creating catchments by varying the type of cost surface generated. The
three choices available on the opening screen are Euclidean, Walking Time, and Path
Distance. These methods are discussed in detail in section 4.2.4 on page 75. For any
of the three choices, the precision value must be set in order to give LA a range for
which the area can fall into while searching. The smaller the value, the more precise
the results will be, however values under 5 are not recommended because it could
make finding the area target impossible. This is due to limitations imposed by DEM
resolution which can make the minimum step outwards more than the range deemed
acceptable with the precision setting. For example, using a 30m resolution DEM, the
area difference between 1000m and 1030m from the origin (using Euclidean method)
is π · 10302 − π · 10002 = 3332915.646 − 3141592.654 = 191322.9922m2 which is a large
area, and it gets bigger the further out on the cost surface you go.
GRASS Data
When LA is launched from a GRASS shell, a list of available mapsets appears in a drop
down menu on the opening screen. This allows the software to do three things. First, it
allows LA to use any of the GIS layers which were prepared for use as land classification
masks. Second, the DEM required for the creation of the cost surface used in the land
search routines must be contained in the selected mapset. Thirdly, all of the results
from the land search process will be saved to the selected mapset.

84

4.3.2

LA’s Diet Screen

Figure 4.16: The Diet screen sets the dietary divisions and other basic diet input factors, and
displays a detailed breakdown of the diet.

85

4.3.3

LA’s Crops Screen

Figure 4.17: The main Crops screen where the crops to be included in the model are selected,
their attributes displayed, and information for common land classification set. The Crop Manager and Crop Parameter Manager are launched from this screen.

Each crop that gets defined in the Crop Manager is listed in a table at the top of this
screen. If an individual crop is to be included in the analysis, a checkmark is placed
in the checkbox to the left. Each crop also has a drop down menu where parameters
which have been associated to the crop in the Crop Parameter Manager can be selected.
If more than one crop is to use the same type of land, a common landuse classification mask raster can be selected from the drop down list once the Use Custom Suitability
Mask for Common Cropland checkbox has been checked. If slope is desired for use as
a land classification factor, it can be generated and incorporated into the analysis from
86

this screen. Checking the associated checkbox allows a maximum usable slope to be
defined. If both suitability masks are selected, the slope mask is applied to the custom
mask.

4.3.4

LA Crop Manager

Every crop has unique characteristics, and LA splits these defining qualities into two
main areas: details of the plant and parameter settings.
Defining the Plants LA uses several input fields to define a plant (Fig.4.18).
1. Name - This is, quite simply, the name you wish to give the crop. This can be
the same as another crop, as LA uses a GUID (Globally Unique IDentifier) when
saving the data. An example of when this could be useful is perhaps when the
same crop is grown on different land, which gives lower or higher yields. It is
therefore possible, for example, to have three crops called ‘Wheat’, each with
different average yields corresponding to the land classified as suitable for it. In
order to tell the difference between these like-named crops, there is the Notes
field (#2 in this list).
2. Notes - This field is used to differentiate between crops that have the same, or
similar, names. For example, if we were to continue using the wheat example
from above, you might use ‘Marginal Land’, ‘Average Land’, and ‘Ideal Land’ to
reflect the respective yield expectancies.
3. Yield - Here you must enter what you think the average yield for the crop would
have been. This is a measure of Kg produced per the given area of sown land.
Currently, you can choose between dunums and hectares as area units.
4. Food Value - The number of calories in 1 Kg of that part of the crop which is
eaten (ie. the grain or fruit).
5. Fodder - Fodder is the straw and chaff left after processing the crop or grain.
This means that you must take into account the use of straw and chaff in other
applications or activities such as textile or pottery production, etc. The Fodder
Yield is a measure of weight how many Kg of Straw and Chaff (per area unit) that
is made available to animals for feed. Enter the number of Kilograms expected
to be produced from this crop per area unit4.22 . Note that this fodder amount
is solely for consumption by animals. If straw or chaff is being used for other
purposes, it must be taken out of the total expected fodder level.
4.22

This has to be the same as the setting for Yield area units, which is currently either Dunums or Hectares

87

6. TDN - The TDN (Total Digestive Nutrients) of the fodder is, like grazing land, a
measure of the food value of the fodder.
7. Area Units - Although Landuse Analyst’s output is always expressed in Hectares,
you can choose between Hectares and Dunums when defining your crops. This is
particularly useful if the source of your data is in Dunums, and not Hectares.4.23

4.3.5

LA’s Crop Parameters

Once the plants that are being grown as crops have been defined, LA needs the specifics
of how each crop is being grown, as well as what portion of the settlement’s diet it
provides (Fig. 4.19). It also needs to know what land is capable of growing each crop.
This is done by selecting Common or Specific Land Suitability masks (if Specific Land
is selected, the Raster Mask must be selected from the drop down list on this screen).
The two critical entries here, however, are crop rotation and the selection of suitability
masks.
Crop Rotation

As stated previously (Section 4.2.3 on page 66), specifying the use of

the common farming technique of crop rotation (Table 4.1) is critical when determining
how much land is required for food production, as it has the potential to more than
double the area target for a crop. Complicated crop rotation scenarios are possible in
LA, and the process of setting this up are explained in detail in section 4.2.3 on page
66.
Another important aspect of defining crop rotation concerns animals. It is possible
for animals to graze the fallow land, which will reduce the amount of grazing land
otherwise required to sustain the animals. If fallow land is to be grazed, this box must
be checked.
Using the ratio of crop land to fallow land along with the food value of the fallow
land allows LA to accurately adjust the grazing land requirements for the animal herds.
In order to know the contribution fallow land makes to the animal’s feed requirements,
it is necessary to know the food value of the available fallow land. This is given in the
Fallow’s Food Value settings. The settings are in units of energy per area of land. Again,
a choice between TDN/MCals and Dunums/Hectares is offered for convenience.
Required Surplus Production In addition to the production levels required for supplying the settlement with food, allowances for next year’s sowing and spoilage must
be made. This is expressed as the percentage of the production level (calculated for the
settlement’s food needs) which has to be added to that level. Using the values shown
4.23

It is relatively simple to add other area units by changing the source code, and at some point, the
ability to do so will actually be integrated into the software as an advanced feature.

88

in Figure 4.19, an additional 20% + 30% = 50% of the settlement’s production target
must be added to account for the two.

89

Figure 4.18: The characteristics of each crop is entered in the Crop Manager, which is launched
from the main Crops screen.

90

Figure 4.19: From the Crop Parameter Manager details for land suitability classification maps,
diet contribution and other settings relating to agricultural techniques are made.

91

4.3.6

LA’s Animal Screen

Figure 4.20: The main Animals screen where the animals to be included in the model are
selected, their attributes displayed, and information for common grazing land classification set.
The Animal Manager and Animal Parameter Manager are launched from this screen.

Each species that gets defined in the Animal Manager is listed in a table at the top
of this screen. If an individual species is to be included in the analysis, a checkmark
is placed in the checkbox to the left. Each species also has a drop down menu where
parameters which have been associated to the animal in the Animal Parameter Manager
can be selected.
If more than one animal is to use the same grazing land, a common grazing land
classification mask raster can be selected from the drop down list once the Use Custom
92

Suitability Mask for Common Grazing Land checkbox has been checked. If common
grazing land is being used, the food value of this land must be entered on this screen.
If slope is desired for use as a land classification factor, it can be generated and incorporated into the analysis from this screen. Checking the associated checkbox allows
a maximum usable slope to be defined. The lower setting should be the same as the
upper setting for slope mask of common cropland (if common cropland is using a slope
mask). If both suitability masks are selected, the slope mask is applied to the custom
mask.

4.3.7

LA’s Animal Manager

Figure 4.21: The characteristics of each animal are entered in the Animal Manager, which is
launched from the main Crops screen.

LA uses several input variables to define an animal (Fig. 4.21).
93

Animal Description
1. Name - Enter the name of the species you are defining in the name field. As with
crops, you do not need a unique name. You can have, for example, two animals
defined, both named ‘Sheep’. LandUse Analyst uses a special method of saving
the animals to eliminate the issue of duplicate filenames. The Notes field allows
a convenient way to differentiate between like-named animals.
2. Notes - Because LandUse Analyst allows more than one type of animal to be defined, the Notes: field allows you to give a brief description of the the animal. For
example, you may have two ‘Sheep’ defined, and the Notes fields could contain
‘For Slaughter’ and ‘Wool Producers’ to distinguish between them.
3. Food Value - Quite simply, this is the number of calories in one kilogram of meat
from the animal. A common value for this variable is around 3000.
4. Usable Meat - The production targets for animals are in Kg of meat, so to be
compatible with animal numbers, you must know the percentage of the animal’s
live weight that is usable for food. You can also take into account here the efficiency of the butchering technique that the population used. In other words, if
you believe they were wasteful, this is where you would make an adjustment to
integrate that.
5. Kill Weight - The average live weight of the animals at the time of slaughter.
Animals may have been slaughtered for butchering at any weight, but LandUse
Analyst needs to know the average weight of the animals when they are slaughtered.
6. Weaning Weight - This is the average live weight of the individual offspring at
the time when they are no longer allowed to suckle from their mother (weaning
age).
7. Grow Time - The length of time from birth to slaughter weight. This is quite
important for estimating the herd size. The longer it takes an animal to reach
slaughter weight from birth, the higher the number of animals alive at any given
time. This will have a direct affect on the amount of feed required to sustain the
herd.
8. Death Rate - LandUse Analyst accommodates for birthing deaths only. If an animal survives to weaning age but dies before slaughter, it is not modeled at this
time. However, you can adjust the death rate setting to indicate the average
survival rate of births. This is important for determining herd size, as it affects
the number of mothers needed to sustain the production levels required by the
settlement.
94

9. Sexual Maturity - The age in months at which the females become sexually mature.
10. Adult Weight - The average weight of an adult animal. This value is used when
calculating the dietary contribution that animals culled from the breeding herd
make.
11. Females:Males - This ratio indicates the number of females in the breeding herd
that one sexually mature male can service.
12. Breeding Life - Once sexual maturity is reached, the expected additional number
of years the animals will be viable for breeding.
13. Conception % - The percent of adult females that become pregnant after breeding
has been attempted.
14. Young/Birth - Average number of young born per birthing event.
15. Weaning Age - The average age at which the offspring are weaned from their
mother.
16. Gestation Time - The number of days of gestation for the animal.
17. Estrous Cycle - The number of days in the animals’ estrous cycle.
18. Lactation Time - The total number of days after birth that the female is capable
of producing milk.
Daily Feed Requirements
1. Select Units - The software supports units of MCalories or TDN (Total Digestible
Nutrients) for measuring the animals daily feed requirements. This choice is
available to make it easier to incorporate data from different sources. The software automatically converts TDN values to MCals for consistency.
2. Pregnant Female - Average daily feed requirements during gestation.
3. Lactating Female - Average daily feed requirements while lactating.
4. Maintenance (Adult) - Average daily feed requirements while neither gestating
nor lactating. This value also applies to adult males in the herd.
5. Juvenile - This value is the daily feed requirement per kilogram of the offspring.
As the animals increase in size, their daily feed requirements grow. Animals can
experience very rapid growth that slows with age. Using this method allows for a
non-linear tabulation of their total annual requirement if desired. The algorithms
95

in this thesis use a simpler, linear growth rate assumption, but the software is
capable of the other. The linear method was used because it is simpler, and as the
goal of this research is not in modelling herds but rather studying landscape, the
difference the more complicated non-linear method makes would not be appreciably different in the end.
By-Products
1. Milk Checkbox - If the animal is capable of producing dairy products, this box
must be checked.
2. Milk - The mean grams of milk day−1 the animal is capable of producing.
3. Food Value - The food energy in the animal’s milk.
4. Fleece Checkbox - If this animal produces a fleece, this box must be checked.
5. Fleece - The mean weight a fleece produced animal−1 year−1 .
• Common Land - Sometimes land is suitable for grazing by more than one type
of animal. LA can designate a single suitability mask for grazing land that is
suitable for several types of animals. It is also possible to have an animal use
both common land and specific land at the same time. When this is the desire,
equal preference is given to all animals grazing the common land. It may also
have been the case that some animals were given preference to the common
land if the other suitable land was further away than the other animals using it.
A workaround for this problem is that LA produces classified maps of the land
being used, so if one animal is being forced to travel much further than others,
the settings can be changed to balance this by removing the other animals one
at a time from using the common grazing land. It may turn out, however, that
there is no ‘ideal’ solution, and that the animals simply have to travel the extra
distance.
• Specific Land - Sometimes it is desirable to specify that land is suitable for grazing by only one type of animal. LA allows a unique land suitability mask to be

designated for an individual animal. Animals can use both common land and
specific land at the same time, as mentioned above.4.24

4.3.8

LA’s Animal Parameters

Modelling animals using generic input fields presents several challenges that plants do
not. For starters, a certain number of females must be kept solely as breeding stock,
4.24

More detailed information on this is available in LA’s Application Handbook, but since this method is
not used in this thesis, is not described here.

96

and this number must be calculated based upon production requirements. Secondly,
the possibility exists that part of the animals’ diet was from either straw/chaff left over
from harvesting crops, or directly from harvested grain. In the case of grain being used
as feed, the amount used must be considered when determining the production targets
for the crops. Thirdly, if crop rotation was happening and fallow land was present,
there is the possibility that this was used as grazing land, and would therefore reduce
the amount of natural grazing land required. This also adds complexity to the crop
models because grazing fallow land adds fertilizer, potentially increasing yields. This
phenomenon can be factored in to Landuse Analyst by manually adjusting the expected
yield of the affected crops.

Details
1. Name - Enter a description of the parameter settings being defined in the name
field. As with crops and animals, you do not need a unique name. You can
have, for example, two parameters defined, both named ‘EEBI’. LA uses a special
method of saving the animals to eliminate the issue of duplicate filenames. The
Notes field allows a convenient way to differentiate between like-named parameters.
2. Notes - Because LA allows more than one type of parameter to be defined, the
Notes field allows for a brief description of the the parameter. For example,
you may have two parameter settings named ‘EEBI’ defined, and the Notes fields
could contain ‘Animals Fed Supplements’ and ‘Animals Not Fed Supplements’ to
distinguish between them. This makes it easy to set up multiple scenarios, beneficial when wanting to duplicate the same parameter settings for more than one
analysis.
3. Animal - All defined animals appear in this drop down list. This must be set to
indicate which animals these parameter settings apply to.
4. Raster Mask - If a specific land classification mask is to be used in addition to
or instead of Common Grazing Land, the raster mask is selected from the drop
down list, which lists all available rasters in the currently selected mapset (set on
the Main Screen).
5. Fallow Priority - If the animals are allowed to graze fallow cropland, their access
priority is set from this drop down menu. Likewise, if the animal is not to be
allowed access to the fallow land, that option is also available in the list.
97

Land Suitability Selection
1. Common Land - When checked, the common land classification mask is to be
used when searching for suitable land.
2. Specific Land - When checked, the specific land classification mask set from the
drop down menu above is to be used when searching for suitable land.
Portion of Domestic Meat Diet
1. Entry Box - The animals portion (expressed as a percent) of the domestic meat
portion of the diet is entered here.
2. More - To determine the correct setting for the entry box above, pressing the More
button brings up the Assemblage Conversion Utility which assists in the process of
allowing for differences in body weight of the different animals when calculating
diet contribution input values.
LA allows animals to use fodder as food. The fodder contribution is expressed
as grams per day for both the crop produce and/or the crop’s straw/chaff (fodder).
The number of days animals are fed is also entered. In this model, the only animals
eligible to receive supplemental feed are those gestating. This can be easily changed
but currently requires minor adjustments to the source code4.25 .
The model distinguishes between fodder (straw/chaff) and straight grain, providing
separate input fields for each. When setting up the model, the user supplies fodder
production levels for the crops, as well as caloric levels for the fodder. The software
calculates the total available fodder from all crops, and if the entered amount from the
crops selected for supplying fodder ends up being too much, fodder from the rest of the
crops is used. If the total amount of fodder available from all crops is still insufficient,
the amount of fodder being fed to the animal is reduced to the amount available from
the crops being grown in the model. When more than one type of animal is being fed
fodder, and this occurs, the amount is divided proportionately.

4.3.9

LA’s Assemblage Conversion Utility

When the Assemblage Conversion Utility is first opened, there are no entries in the table.
Animals can be entered from a list, or manually. If more than one scenario is to be
explored, there is no need to exit the utility; simply pushing the Clear Table button
takes the user back to a blank table. If desired, the table, with or without the results,
can be saved to a file with a name of their choice by clicking on the Save button. The
resultant file can then be imported into a spreadsheet or database program.
4.25

The ability to give select animals different supplementary feed will be a future enhancement to the
software.

98

Automatic Entry
The most convenient way is to simply select the animals included in the analysis from
the drop down list, select the count type, the amount, and click Insert. The choices of
count type are NISP, MNI and total weight (in kg). If a mistake is made after the Insert
button has been pushed, all values in the table can be edited, as in a spreadsheet, by
simply double clicking on the relevant cell in the table. Once all desired entries have
been put into the table, a push of the Calculate button completes the % of Diet column
of the table with entries for the adjusted diet portions.
Manual Entry
The manual entry method is offered in case the model has not been completely set
up yet, in which case not all animals are necessarily available from the drop down
list. This method involves manually entering the name of the animal, the kilograms of
usable meat obtainable per animal, and the number. Beyond this, all other aspects are
identical to those of the automatic entry method.

4.3.10

LA’s Calculations Screen

Once all of the input factors have been entered, the Calculation screen becomes available. This screen is split into two halves, with a list of all crops and their calculation
results on the left, and a list of all animals and their calculations on the right. By
clicking on a crop or animal, the adjacent column is automatically populated with the
results. Several report screens are available from this screen, from which the text can
be copied and pasted into software of the user’s choice. If the results are wanted for
placement on a website, pushing the HTML button will generate a complete report that
is ready for publishing onto a website.

4.3.11

LA’s Results Screen

The Results screen lists the input variables in their entirety as well as the results of all
calculations. This is a rough and ready kind of report that the user can scroll through
to check on whatever it is they want to see. The results are not displayed until after the
GIS analysis has been completed.

4.3.12

LA’s Log Screen

The log screen shows the various steps of the algorithms used for calculating results. A
high level of output can be enabled here by selecting the Debugging feature from the
Help screen. This allows a user to scrutinise the way in which the data is handled. For
example, in debugging mode, each step of the fallow allocation process can be seen,
99

and while not in debugging mode, only the results of the fallow land distribution is
available.

100

Figure 4.22: The Animal Parameter Manager sets grazing land suitability classification maps,
animals’ diet supplements from fodder or other crop products and fallow cropland grazing
priorities.

101

Figure 4.23: Launched from the Animal Parameter Manager, the Assemblage Conversion Utility
provides a quick and easy method for compensating for the different meat yields per animal
when calculating each animal’s percent contribution to the inhabitants of the settlement’s diet.

102

Figure 4.24: The Calculations screen showing all crops and animals in the model and their
associated calculations.

103

Figure 4.25: The Results screen, showing all model input variables used.

104

Figure 4.26: The Log screen shows details of the GIS process once the analysis has been run.

105

4.3.13

LA’s Help Screen

Figure 4.27: The Help screen contains LA’s Application Handbook, a comprehensive Help Manual for using the software.

The Application Handbook is a comprehensive guide to using LA. Each input variable is listed with a full explanation of it’s purpose. Each control (e.g. slider, steppers,
checkboxes) is fully explained. In addition, the overall process is outlined and explained as well.
In addition to the Application Manual, if a user hovers their cursor over any input
field, a brief description (called a Tool Tip) is displayed. On top of this, it is possible
to right click on any input field or control and a detailed explanation of it’s purpose or
instructions of its use will be given.

4.3.14

Future development

LA is still in the early stages of its development and many improvements to usability
and application capabilities are planned. That said, the application is already capable
of producing useful results (though more testing is still needed) in a more flexible, user
friendly and efficient manner than the original BASH prototype.
106

There are many routes that LA can take from this point with respect to it’s future
development; it can continue on as a standalone application, or turn into a plugin
for another application like openModeler or QGis. Before these decisions are made,
however, the features in the current version must be finalised and implemented. Some
features which are currently in the planning phase are network analysis for inter-site
relationships, experiment settings, where the model can be set to run a given number
of times using different input variables, and report generation complete with graphs
and maps.
The incorporated network analysis feature will be able to automatically look at all
contemporaneous sites in a given area, and examine production potential. If a site can
potentially produce excess of one resource, but falls short in another, it will look to
neighboring sites to see if they can make up the difference. If there is a potential for
trade or supplementation, the most efficient walking routes can then be found using
r.drain on a cost surface generated with r.walk. This could potentially show the likely
pathways between sites, as well as how intensively used they might have been. Taking
this further, one might look for places where these routes merge, or cross, which might
be an indicator for a potential archaeological site which has yet to be discovered. This
can be used for resources besides agricultural ones, so exploring the potentials of this
will be very exciting.
The current version of LA requires that every scenario be modeled manually and
separately. For example, one might wish to look at how adjusting the yield of crops
would affect the land requirements to simulate drought years. One might also want to
compare the results of different dietary proportions of meat content to plant content.
With the experiment module, it will be possible to have the software automatically
cycle through all of these different scenarios automatically.
Drawing on features developed in openModeler, I plan to have LA compile better
quality reports, complete with spreadsheets and graphs. This will be a great time saving
feature. In addition, this will provide consistent results presentation that will make it
easier to systematically compare results with other users.
One big feature will be the ability to present and share data online. The infrastructure of the software has been designed from the very beginning with this in mind. The
ability to access the entire program, GIS and all, from a web browser is also completely
feasible because of this. In my mind, this would be the greatest enhancement of all.
Having thoroughly explained the methodology in this chapter, the implementation
will be demonstrated in Chapter 5, where a detailed exploration of multiple scenarios
will be presented for the site of Tel esh Shuna North in the Jordan Valley.

107

108

Chapter 5

Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age
Landscape Engagement at Tell esh
Shuna North
“[Shuna is] ...one of the most important early sites in the entire Jordan Valley”
James Mellaart (1962, 130-131)

5.1

Introduction

Chapter 4 presented a detailed overview of the Landuse Analyst program that has been
specifically developed to be a large contribution of this thesis. Landuse Analyst is a
methodological tool that can be used to model prehistoric landscape use. Building
upon this discussion, and illustrating a functional implementation of the software, this
chapter addresses questions relating to the degree of impact Chalcolithic and Early
Bronze Age communities had on their landscapes. This is undertaken through the
detailed analysis of possible landscape use around the Chacolithic/Early Bronze Age
site of Tell Esh Shuna North, Jordan.
First presented is a brief overview of the settlement of Tell Esh Shuna North (hereafter ‘Shuna’) and a history of its excavation. Following this, the input factors used in
the modelling process (e.g. population, diet composition and crop yields) are outlined
and entered into Landuse Analyst. The resulting datasets, comprising 108 permutations (’scenarios’) of the input data are presented in the form of maps and charts. The
charts show the input factor combinations and mathematical calculations for each scenario, while the maps show the potential landuse catchments that are generated. A
brief written summary of the observations and interpretations made for these scenarios
is then presented.
Expanding on the results of this implementation and analysis, Chapter 6 presents a
network analysis of EB I sites around Shuna. This is undertaken in order to:
109

• examine the cumulative effects of the impact of settlement systems on the landscape.

• explore how interactions between settlements may have affected the nature of EB
communities’ engagements with their landscapes.

• investigate the potential nature of exchange and interaction between communities, as well as trade and exchange between settlements in the region.

The implications of the results presented in this chapter for understanding local
landuse possibilities are discussed in this chapter, whilst the regional landuse patterns
in the Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age of the Southern Levant are discussed at length
in Chapter 6.

5.2

Shuna: Physiography

Shuna is particularly suitable to use as a case study for modelling landscape use during
the Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age (EBA) because the archaeological deposits encountered have provided clear evidence that it was continuously inhabited throughout
this transitional period.
The “rare and important sequence” (Philip and Baird 1993, 13) preserved at the site
includes detailed palaeobotanical and faunal evidence that is fundamental to furthering
our understanding of the land use strategies and agricultural practises pursued by the
people who settled there. The availability of such direct archaeological evidence is critical for the modelling of prehistoric landuse patterns, and it is therefore of fundamental
importance with regard to the current study. It is for these reasons, in combination,
that Shuna has been selected as the primary case study for the application of Landuse
Analyst (as outlined in Chapter 4). For the purposes of this research, details pertaining to the palaeobotany and fauna recovered from Shuna have been derived from the
draft final report of the excavations at Shuna, provided by Dr. Douglas Baird. These
reports (Holden, Croft, and Millard) are to be included in Baird and Philip’s forthcoming monograph (Baird and Philip, forthcoming) on their excavations at Shuna. Before
applying Landuse Analyst to Shuna, a brief overview of its location and resources, as
well as the previous research conducted at the site, is now presented.

5.2.1

Location

Shuna is located about 11 km south of Lake Tiberias, roughly 3km east of the Jordan River and 4km south of the Yarmouk River. The geographical co-ordinates used
for Shuna throughout this study are Universal Transverse Mercator Zone 36 North,
110

744800 Easting, 3611100 Northing (UTM 36N 744800E 3611100N). The EPSG5.1 code
is 32636 and is defined as:
+proj=utm +zone=36 +ellps=WGS84 +datum=WGS84 +units=m +no_defs

Figure 5.1: Shuna as seen in Google Earth looking south

Shuna is situated on the alluvial fan of the Wadi Arab (Figure 5.1). The alluvial
soils in this area result from the presence of a large lake in the valley during the Late
Pleistocene. Lake Lisan came into existence ∼ 70,000 ka BP and had significantly
receded by 15,000 ka BP (Bartov et al. 2002), leaving nearly 10,000 years for alluvium
to accumulate before the initial occupation of Shuna. Figure 5.2 shows the approximate
levels of Lake Lisan at both its maximum extent (164 m below sea level) and at 300 m
below sea level. The lake level was ∼ 300m below sea level at 15,000 years BP, and
was receding at that time (Bartov et al. 2002).

Shuna North is located in the ‘Jordan Valley’ physiographical category as defined
and described in Section 2.2 on page 9 . The northern part of the Southern Levant, in
which Shuna lies, is characterised physiographically by both rugged hill country and
plains (Esse 1991) (See Figure 2.2). Shuna is located on the eastern edge of the Jordan
Valley floor. The terrain immediately to the east of Shuna is much more rugged than
5.1
The International Association of Oil & Gas producers (OGP) Surveying and Positioning Committee
maintains and publishes a dataset of parameters for coordinate reference systems and coordinate transformation descriptions. See http://www.epsg.org for further details.

111

(a) 164m below mean sea level

(b) 300m below mean sea level

Figure 5.2: Lake Lisan at a proposed high level of 160 m BMSL and at 300 m BMSL. Lake Lisan
had receded to -300 m MSL by 15,000 BP. These images created in GRASS using SRTM (Shuttle
Radar Topography Mission) data with the r.lake module.

in the valley, while to the west, an expansive area of flat lowland is found (also clearly
visible in Figure 2.2).
A map showing the underlying geology of the area immediately surrounding Shuna
can be seen in Figure 5.3.
As everywhere on Earth, the Jordan Valley and surrounding areas are prone to
change by continuous geomorphological processes. Given the very short span of time
(in geological terms) since the EB I occupation of Shuna (∼5000 years) to present,
these processes are unlikely to have markedly altered the underlying and basic form of
the landscape, as outlined above. Further deposition of alluvium onto the valley floor
can be assumed, while the relatively steep sides of the valley may have experienced erosion and the wadis may have been downcut slightly by fluvial action . However, specifically in relation to the land catchment analysis of Shuna presented in this chapter,
these possible changes in landscape due to erosion are highly unlikely to significantly
alter the results. This is because the area of land potentially affected is small in comparison to the area of land contained in the sustaining catchment areas and when even
a moderate amount of area is added to a catchment’s total, the outer perimeter need
not change much to absorb it. For the purposes of this thesis then, the contemporary
and prehistoric landscapes of the Jordan Valley are considered to be equivalent.
112

Figure 5.3: Geology Map of region around Shuna

5.2.2

Climate

Today, two major climatic zones exist in the northern part of the Southern Levant, and
they generally dictate the agricultural pursuits of the people living within them (Esse
1991, 29).
“ More general, and perhaps profound, distinctions can be drawn between
the two major phyto geographic zones in northern Palestine: the Mediterranean and the Irano-Turanian. Moving from one zone to another means
making the transition from a classic Mediterranean crop economy (vine,
olive, wheat) to a more marginal steppe environment that is better adapted
to animal husbandry and lies at the lower end of the scale permitting dry
farming. In northern Palestine the marginal zone is not large in area when
compared with the classic Mediterranean zone. It covers only the area of
the Rift Valley from the southern end of the Sea of Galilee to the southern
end of the Beth Shan Valley.”
– Esse 1991, 14
The Mediterranean climate in this region is characterised by distinctly seasonal rainfall
patterns which are ideally suited for plants that thrive in a shortened growing season
typical for the Holocene (Algaze et al. 2001, 15). This climatic zone is particularly
113

well suited for the growth of wheat and vine and olive crops, and can also support
leguminous crops (e.g. peas lentils, bitter vetch) which allows for more effective crop
rotation and helps prevent depletion of the soil. In contrast, the Irano-Turanian Steppe
zone (characterised by transitional areas between wooded regions and deserts and
is generally located in the Dead Sea-Jordan depression region) consists of a variety
of small herb like plants and scrub, and other herbaceous plants adapted to aridity
(Cordova 2005, 113). This climatic zone is not as suitable as the Mediterranean climate
zone for the growth of crops other than cereals, and additionally generally restricts
agricultural production to summer cropping, where crops are generally sown in March,
April and May (Abbo et al. 2003, 441). The transition from one of these zones to the
other generally coincides with the lower limit for sustainable dry farming (Esse 1991,
30). The significance of this dry farming limit border is amplified by inter-annual
variability in rainfall levels, impacting upon long-term planning and risk management
strategies (Esse 1991, 30), both of which are factors to be considered when looking at
landuse strategies. The importance of the abrupt transition from one zone to another
is highlighted by Esse (1991):
“The importance of this Mediterranean/steppe dichotomy lies not in its extent, however, but in the implications that such an abrupt climatic and
vegetational shift has for subsistence in the area. The very nature of the
environment forces the consideration of certain questions, not only about
subsistence, but about social organization, intraregional cooperation, and
even interregional trade.”
– Esse 1991, 14
Current evidence suggests that the climate of the southern Levant at the time of the
EBA occupation of Shuna would have been somewhat wetter than it is today. Paleoenvironmental data is derived from various sources which include palynology, geomorphology, deep-sea cores, lacustrine deposits, faunal evidence, and fossilised land snails.
(Levy 1992, 68).
It is suggested, and generally accepted that the Early Holocene experienced two climatic phases, 9000-7000 B.P and again at around 5500 B.P. (Levy 1992, 68) that were
characterised by wetter conditions than are typical of the southern Levant today. For
this reason it is unlikely that the differences between the contemporary and prehistoric
climate of the southern Levant significantly influenced the overall viability of agricultural practises or type of landuse management strategies that could be employed. This
is because, even today, the climate at Shuna lies comfortably within the environmental
parameters needed for dry farming (200 mm (Oates 1973) 250-300 mm (Arnon 1972)
300 mm (Adams 1962) and 300-400 mm (Zohary 1962)), receiving on average 400
mm of precipitation per annum (Figure 2.3).
114

The archaeological record preserved at Shuna also provides clues about the palaeoclimate during the Chalcolithic and EBA. The crop seeds recovered (e.g. einkorn, emmer, barley, lentils) require a minimal amount of water if they are to be successfully
grown. Additionally, the high frequency of sheep and goat remains represented in the
faunal assemblages suggests that water stress was not experienced by the prehistoric
settlers of this location. Further supporting such an inference is the bovid faunal record,
which shows an increase in the number of cattle over time from the Chalcolithic to the
LEBI (Figure 5.10). Cattle, being larger than caprines, require a great deal more water
for survival than either sheep or goats (Whitehead et al. 2008, 522), thus strengthening
the argument that Shuna offered a relatively stable climate suitable for arable farming
during the EBA.
Having outlined the meaningful similarities between the contemporary and prehistoric (Chalcolithic/EBA) landscape, geology and climate of Shuna, it is possible to make
some inferences about the availability of resources and the use of the landscape by its
prehistoric inhabitants.

5.2.3

Hydrology

The river system surrounding Shuna, which is dominated by the Yarmuk and Jordan
rivers, provides a constant water supply to the area as well as an exit route for the large
drainage basin that converges on the settlement from the Wadi Arab (See Figure 5.4).
Unlike some areas on the western side of the Jordan river (e.g.
Beth Shan) which can have a
tendency to suffer from swamp
like conditions and salinity problems (Esse 1991), Shuna benefits from a location which provides large tracts of fertile and
flat arable land on and around
the alluvial fan of the Wadi el
Arab. Surface water supplies are
susceptible to drought and sea- Figure 5.4: The major drainage basins for the region sursonality, however, perhaps mak- rounding Shuna
ing groundwater sources such as
springs a more appealing water supply (Macumber 2001, 2). Shuna’s location benefits
from large groundwater resources fed by a large drainage basin, shown in Figure 5.4.
Even today, the Wadi Arab aquifer is an important source of water. Today’s Wadi Arab
Groundwater Project currently supplies an astonishing 20 million m3 of water per year
to the people of Jordan (Murakami 1995, Section 4.2.3). Thus, even if the ground
115

water supply was a fraction of what it is currently (and given the likelihood of a wetter climate the water supplies were likely to actually have been more abundant than
they are today), there is little doubt as to the hydrological suitability of the settlement’s
location.

Figure 5.5: Shuna Geology showing possible portion of the valley (classed as suitable) devoted
to cropland in maximum cropland scenarios.

5.2.4

Landscape

Located on the floor of the wide and flat Jordan Valley, Shuna’s prehistoric inhabitants
would have benefited from the abundant, flat and fertile alluvial soil that was ideally
suited for the growth of cereal crops. In the hill country to the east and the mountainous region in the northern part of the southern Levant, the rugged landscape does
contain smaller areas where people could sustain themselves, albeit in lower numbers
due to the nature of the landscape. Vine crops and olives flourish in a Mediterranean
116

climate and well drained soils (Esse 1991), which the limestone escarpments to the
east provide. However, these latter areas would have provided limited agricultural
land, and communication with other communities would have been difficult due to the
rugged terrain. This may explain why so few large cities or regional centres developed
in the northern hill country (Esse 1991).
In contrast, the lowland areas to the west of Shuna may have given rise to large
and important settlements, which may have been more prone to fluctuations in both
prosperity and population. This possibly resulted from the desirable nature of the
area in terms of its location at the crossroads of major international trade routes (Esse
1991). During times of political and social instability, the urban centres of the lowlands
may have been less secure than those of the upland areas, and apparently experienced
periodic depopulation (Esse 1991). This suggests that topography, in combination with
the variable suitability of land for different landuse and agricultural practises, may
have played a vital role in the fluctuating settlement distribution seen in the region
(Esse 1991).
The methodology upon which Landuse Analyst is based relies on a reconstruction
of diet and from that estimates on production potential of each diet contributor. In
order to estimate average crop yields or estimate the food value of grazing land to
animals, it is essential to know what the physiographical conditions were. Now that an
overview of this important background information has been presented, a discussion
on the archaeological excavations carried out at Shuna is given in the following section.

5.3

Excavation History

The input factors used in Landuse Analyst are based as much as possible on archaeological evidence. The more factors backed up by this evidence, the more robust the
model will be, making the results more credible. Following the above physiographical
overview, important for incorporating the archaeological evidence into the model, a
history of excavations is presented in this section.
Archaeological evidence from a number of excavations indicate that Tel esh Shuna
North was a large settlement (upwards of 20 ha by the Late EB I) which was located at
an important junction of major north-south and east-west trade routes (Philip and Baird
1993, 15). With continuous occupation from the Chalcolithic through to the Late EB
I, (supported by Baird and Philips intentional focus on establishing a chronology using
absolute dating techniques) it is an ideal settlement to use to further the understanding
of the development of large communities. Given the importance of Shuna and the
detailed analysis of the site landuse patterns presented in this thesis, it is now pertinent
to outline the excavation work that has been carried out at the site. Unfortunately,
for reasons of brevity, it is not possible to provide a full and detailed history of the
117

work undertaken at the site, however, for a more comprehensive history the reader is
referred to ( Schumacher 1890, Schumacher 1895, Leonard 1992, Gustavson-Gaube
and Erskine 1985, Gustavson-Gaube and Erskine 1986, de Contenson 1960, Baird and
Philip 1992, Philip and Baird 1993, Baird and Philip 1994, and Philip and Baird 1995)
Shuna was first noted by Schumacher (1890) who visited the site in 1887. Although
he said little more than to remark that it was an ancient site, he did make notes on
conversations he had had with local people (Schumacher 1890, 205), recording the
name given to both the ancient site upon which the modern town was built, and the
nearby wadi. The ancient site was known as Khirbet el-Ekseir, while the wadi was
called Wadi el-Ekseir. The word ‘el-Ekseir’ means ‘of the Castle’ (Schumacher 1890,
205). Baird and Philip have suggested (Baird and Philip 1994, 111) that the use of
this name may reflect the fact that a large building was visible in the late 19th century,
which may be what they called Building 1, uncovered by them in their 1991-1994
excavations.
In 1953, Hasan Abu Awad of the Department of Antiquities of Jordan and Henri de
Contenson excavated a 3 m2 sounding on the highest part of the mound which revealed
an early Chalcolithic occupation (Philip and Baird 1993, 13).
De Contenson (1960, 29) assigned material from his latest layer (Level IV) to the
early Chalcolithic, as he believed the material was related to Jericho VIII/Pottery Neolithic B. Above this he had found a sterile layer, and thus recorded what he thought
was a gap in occupation de Contenson (1960, 13). Philip and Baird (1993, 13) go on
to say :
“Esdraelon ware marked the beginning of the EB I at the site. While de
Contenson (1960, 29) assigned his latest material (Level IV) to EB II, a
recent survey of the EB II-III period in northern Palestine has stated that
’there are few (ceramic) indicators (from Shuna level IV) that would force
an EB II date. Most would fit comfortably into EB I’ (Esse1991, 97).”
This is significant, because what de Contenson thought was a gap in Shuna’s occupation
was likely a misinterpretation on his part, and in fact provides further evidence of
continual occupation.
James Mellaart conducted a sounding further west into the floor of the valley in
1953 (Leonard 1992) where evidence of occupation was found to precede levels containing (the diagnostic EBA) Esdraelon and band-slip wares. This is important, because
this shows that expansion of the site to the west was likely to have occurred during the
EBA, and, by implication, that the settlement was of a significant size (Philip and Baird
1993, 13). Further proof that there was continuous occupation at Shuna is evidenced
by EB II and EB III occupations also appearing in the western part of the site (Leonard
1992, Philip and Baird 1993, 14). For a detailed history of this phase of excavation at
Shuna the reader is referred to (de Contenson 1960 and Leonard 1992).
118

In 1984/85, Carrie Gustavson-Gaube and co-workers exposed a sequence similar
to that excavated by de Contenson’s (Philip and Baird 1993, 14). Rectilinear multiroom structures, attributed to a PNB/Chalcolithic occupation, were succeeded by a
lengthy EB I sequence (Gustavson-Gaube and Erskine 1985, 1986). A 5 x 5 m trench
was opened through the EB I sequence, which exposed a number of structures, most
notably a 1.5 m wide stone wall which was attributed to the later part of the EB I
sequence by Gustavson-Gaube and Erskine (1985, 49). Substantial structures of nondomestic character were also present in this part of the site during the later EB I (Philip
and Baird 1993, 14).
Most recently, Douglas Baird and Graham Philip excavated at Shuna from 1991
to 1994. Their primary focus was directed at furthering an understanding of the development of major centres in the fifth to fourth millennium BC (calibrated) (Philip
and Baird 1993, 15) although they do note (Philip and Baird 1993, 15) that Mellaart’s
concern that the site was under threat from construction and general expansion (Mellaart 1962, 130-131) had been well founded. Sadly, the majority of the tell had been
destroyed by this time (Philip and Baird 1993, 15) meaning that Baird and Philip’s
excavation was necessarily also a rescue operation.
One of the outcomes of their work was the establishment of a well stratified sequence through the transitional period from the Chalcolithic to the Early Bronze Age5.2 .
Previous excavations had not resulted in well documented faunal and botanical data
for the Chalcolithic-EBA transition, which led Baird and Philip to implement “... a rigorous sampling policy, to document any changes in the subsistence economy through
this period.” (Philip and Baird 1993, 15). These sets of data are discussed in Sections
5.5 and 5.6, where they are used as the basis for selecting the dietary input factors in
the site catchment analysis modelling process. The palaeobotanical and faunal assemblages are important because they are used to determine the dietary contributors of the
ancient people living in the settlement.
Settlement extents are used to arrive at population estimates, which are fundamental to the modelling methodology. The relevant archaeological evidence (from the
above mentioned excavations) which has been used in determining the extents of the
settlement during the Chalcolithic, EEBI and LEBI is discussed in detail in section 5.4.1.

5.4

Factors Considered For The Model

Having outlined the contemporary and prehistoric setting of Shuna and the history of
its excavation, it is now important to consider the factors that are crucial in forming the
basis for an accurate and robust application of Landuse Analyst to prehistoric Shuna.
Wherever possible, archaeological data has been used, however for some variables
5.2

Shuna has early EB I deposits dating from 3650 to 3350 BC (calibrated), and later EB 1 deposits
from 3400 to 3000 BC (calibrated)(Philip 2001).

119

archaeological data is not available, and in these cases alternate sources have been
used and their sources noted.

5.4.1

Population

The estimated population of a settlement is one of the most fundamental parameters
in the modelling process; it is the one factor from which nearly all of the calculations
required in the modelling process derive. Population estimates are calculated by determining the size of the site and multiplying that by the estimated population density.
The determination of the size (or extent) of the site is first presented, followed by a
section on how population density estimates were derived.
Determining Settlement Extents at Shuna
Baird and Philip have provided estimates of the area of settlement at Shuna using archaeological data, tell dimensions, surface artefact distribution, and occupation phases
(Baird and Philip, forthcoming). Although they excavated only a very small portion of
the overall site, they combined their results with data from past excavations. In some
instances, the exact location of previous trenches could not be determined (Baird and
Philip, forthcoming), but it was possible to deduce the general area, which enabled
them to be used for determining the extent of the settlement at different periods. In
total, only about 50 square meters of the 20 ha mound have been excavated (Baird and
Philip, forthcoming), but they state:
“Sometimes the precise location of those trenches is not clear, e.g. de Contensons trench, but can be arrived at approximately. Thus De Contensons
trench, Trench I, was in the area of the main road junction in the southern
part of the town probably between 50 and 100 ms SW of our Area D. Mellaarts trench II-IV is shown at the far western edge of the mound (Leonard
Fig.7) and thus is to the west of our Trench H. Combining this presence absence data for occupation phases with extant limits of the site we can draw
broadly valid conclusions about occupation extent.”
– Baird and Philip, (forthcoming)
Because of the importance of population estimates in this methodology, a detailed
explanation is given about how the extents of the settlements at Shuna during the Chalcolithic, EEBI and LEBI were derived because it is from these extents that population
estimates are based.
Example of previous extent estimates are those of de Contenson, who indicated
a length of 1000m NE-SW (de Contenson 1960), and Mellaart, who estimated it at
700-1000 m by 100-150 m wide (Mellaart 1962, 131). Baird notes (Baird and Philip,
forthcoming) that the width of the mound is certainly 200m wide (with the SW possibly
120

Figure 5.6: Location of excavation trenches at Shuna.

wider, and the NE tip slightly narrower) and possibly slightly longer, and gives a maximum extent area estimate of between 16 and 20 ha (Baird and Philip, forthcoming)
for EB I Shuna. By examining the material from every trench that has been excavated
(and whose location is generally known) to see if material from a particular period is
present or not, it is possible to either associate or exclude that part of the mound to the
period being examined. In other words, a lack or presence of materials in a trench dating to a specific phase allows the area of the Shuna mound where the trench is located
to be either included (if the relevant material was present) or excluded (if the relevant
material was absent) in a period’s occupation extent. For trench locations, please refer
to Figure 5.6.
Using the above technique of combining findings from their excavations with past
ones, Baird and Philip, (forthcoming) determined that the Chalcolithic occupation:
• was located centrally on the mound.
• extended into the western part of the site.
• was 1 - 5 hectares in size.
EEBI material was present in Baird and Philip’s trenches A and D in the central
part of the mound, as well as trench H in the west, but was absent from their trench I
(Baird and Philip, forthcoming). Gustavson-Gaube and Erskine (1985) also found EEBI
material in the central area of the mound, as did de Contension (Leonard 1992). Baird
suggests that EEBI material in trench H (in the west) could have been redeposited
121

because there was no EEBI material apparent in discreet deposits that preceded the
LEBI material in Mellaart’s trench (where band slip ceramics are present from earliest
contexts) (Baird and Philip, forthcoming). As well, there was no distinct ‘in situ’ EEBI
ceramics in trench K (Baird and Philip, forthcoming). Trench H, however, is 300 m
SW of trench A, so the presence of any of this material suggests settlement expansion
(Baird and Philip, forthcoming). Settlement expansion was westward from the central
area along the Wadi el Arab, and stretched at least 400 m NE-SW, and would have
covered approximately 7 ha (Baird and Philip, forthcoming).
Mellaart’s trenches II-IV in the extreme west of the site contained band slip and
Crackled ware, as well as the characteristic LEBI holemouth jars (Leonard 1992, Fig.12).
Baird and Philip found LEBI ceramics in situ in the western area as well (trenches H
and I), and also in the NE area of the mound in trench L (Baird and Philip, forthcoming). This information, plus the 1953 surface survey conducted by Mellaart (Leonard
1992) suggests that a lot of the mound had LEBI material on it (Baird and Philip,
forthcoming). Expansion is further evident by:
• the fact that no material preceeding the EBA was found in Mellaart’s trench II

(Leonard 1992, 56)and that no in situ EEBI material was present (Baird and
Philip, forthcoming).

• the absence of in situ EEBI material in Baird and Philip’s area I (Baird and Philip,
forthcoming).

The expansion that occurred from c. 3300 to 3000 BCE (EEBI) expanded to the
north, away from the Wadi el Arab, and a little further to the west along the Wadi el
Arab (Baird and Philip, forthcoming). In total, Baird estimates that the LEBI site covers
between 16 - 20 hectares (Baird and Philip, forthcoming).
Although Shuna has not been modelled beyond the EB I, a brief description of the
settlement extents follows for completeness, as well as to give the reader an idea of
how the settlement continued to change.
From sherds found in areas H, L, and A, an EB II settlement existed (Baird and
Philip 1994), although Baird and Philip, (forthcoming) suggest that due to a complete
lack of in situ EB II material it must have been restricted in size. Mellaart indicated a
distinct EB II level in his trenches II-IV (Leonard 1992, 56) (emphasis mine) but Baird
and Philip, (forthcoming) claim that he had no characteristic EB II ceramics to base this
on.
The EB III phase material (dominated by Khirbet Kerak ware) was found in Areas
A, H and L (Baird and Philip 1994), as well as in Mellaart’s trench to the west (Baird
and Philip, forthcoming). No material from this period was found in Baird and Philip’s
areas I and K (Baird and Philip 1994) suggesting that the northern part of the mound
might have no longer been in use. The settlement stretched along the Wadi el Arab for
122

about 500m with a width of about 150 m occupying an area of about 7.5 ha (Baird and
Philip, forthcoming). In order to derive population estimates, both the size of the site
and its population density must be known. Having shown how Shuna’s extents were
determined, the following section describes how population densities were estimated.
Determining Population Density at Shuna
During the Chalcolithic, structures were quite closely packed together (e.g. Baird and
Philip’s Area D (phases 2-5) (Baird and Philip 1994)). In later phases, although much
of the settlement’s area seemed to be designated for external space there was still evidence of broadroom structures in most of the trenches (Baird and Philip, forthcoming).
Overall, these areas of dense domestic structures and open areas characterised the settlement (Baird and Philip, forthcoming).
The beginning of the EEBI at Shuna saw an increased structure density along with
courtyard areas (Baird and Philip, forthcoming). By the later part of the EEBI, the
central area of the mound bore witness to increased structural density with up to 3
curvilinear/apsidal structures within 3 meters of each other, leaving fairly narrow passages between them (Baird and Philip, forthcoming). Regarding structural density, the
central area of the mound was most dense. Although previous excavations gave no
indication of structures being present on the western part of the mound, it can be assumed that there are structures nearby (Baird and Philip, forthcoming) and that this
area of the tell site was simply less densely occupied. Structures are assumed to be
nearby because an occasional substantial structure (interpreted as multi room habitation buildings) was found in the same areas by Baird and Philip (1994). Baird and
Philip, (forthcoming) suggest that the western area may have occupied more space in
other areas of the mound as well in later parts of the EEBI.
Mellaart’s trench in the western part of the site suggests that a significant portion
of Shuna’s 20 ha was located in this area (Baird and Philip, forthcoming). The LEBI is
not as straight forward as previous periods with respect to occupancy and use (Baird
and Philip, forthcoming) and it is suggested that there might have been a tendency for
the settlement to have been less spacious, but still nuclear families with possible different household arrangements (Baird and Philip, forthcoming). Domestic floor space
was certainly not generous if compared to modern standards in the region, suggesting
potentially higher population density than that seen today (Baird and Philip, forthcoming).
In the local region, traditional nucleated villages of the recent past had 100 people
per ha of settlement (Baird and Philip, forthcoming). 200 people per ha is witnessed
in modern day traditional settlements (Baird and Philip, forthcoming), a figure that is
suggested as being more realistic for the ancient settlement at Shuna. It is suggested
(Baird and Philip, forthcoming) that even figures of 300 people per ha is plausible as a
123

maximum value for the site’s population density.
Calculating Population Levels at Shuna
Using 100 and 300 people for minimum and maximum values, the population range
estimates (Figure 5.8) are 100-600 in the Chalcolithic (1-2 ha), 1000-3000 in the EEBI
(c. 10 ha), and 2000-6000 in the LEBI(c. 20 ha). The occupation extents are shown
in Figure 5.7). Additionally, the following observations are made (Baird and Philip,
forthcoming):
• The Chalcolithic settlement, although modest in size, is not unsubstantial.
• Due to the increasing building density in later phases, the upper values for the
EEBI are the more likely.

Figure 5.7: The estimated footprints of Shuna, as described byDouglas Baird (pers. com.). The
areas are (as calculated inGRASS Gis): Chalcolithic (Blue): 2.5 Ha, Early EB I (Red): 8.3Ha,
and Late EB I (Yellow): 20.9 ha

These current best-estimates for the population size of Shuna from the ChalcolithicLEBI are used as the population input values for Shuna, when modelling the landuse
catchments of the site with Landuse Analyst.

124

Figure 5.8: Population level ranges forShuna Baird and Philip (1994)

125

5.4.2

Land Search Method

All of the modelled site landuse scenarios for Shuna are created using the walking time
method and is being proposed as an acceptable approximation of the ‘real’ distances to
which people of the EBA would have related and as a better way to model the way people actually engaged with their landscape in the prehistoric past, as opposed to ‘flatline’
distances. In some scenarios, particularly ones which produce large catchments, it is
more useful to consider that people would have thought of journeys as ‘a half day walk’
rather than as a journey ‘of x kilometres/miles’.
To emulate this perception of distance with respect to travel times, it is important to
integrate factors affecting the time for journeys (eg. physical obstacles such as rivers,
carrying loads, or herding animals). These factors are discussed in detail in Section
4.2.4, and have been compensated for in Landuse Analyst (Bailey and Davidson 1983
p:92, Browman 1976 p.469) by creating a friction map when creating the cost surface
on which the catchments are based. In order to accommodate the extra time it would
have taken for the prehistoric inhabitants of Shuna to cross rivers, the friction map
used for calculating the walking time cost surface has been adjusted.
By converting the river line vectors to a raster with an inflated value (i.e., more than
the default value of 1) and adding this to the slope map, the rivers have a higher slope
value.
Resultantly the r.walk module adds
extra time for ‘crossing’ them5.3 The
9
8

spect to lakes, except that lakes are

7

given massively inflated values that

6

Woman Comfort
Woman Max
Man Comfort
Man Max

same procedure is employed with re-

render them effectively impassable.

km/hr
4
5

100

cm/s

150

200

250

Mean Walking Speeds

This is clearly a rather artificial situation, as lakes would presumably have
been traversable by boat, but trans-

50

port by boat has not been incorporated into this study to reduce the

0

added associated complexity which
would arise later in Chapter 6 where
regional network analysis is done.
Although the distances used are
Figure 5.9: Mean Walking Speeds (after Bohannon based on walking time, this is dou1997)

bled to reflect the time required for a

5.3

I decided to allocate an additional 30 minutes for crossing rivers which might reflect the extra time
it would have taken to travel to a good crossing point rather than just crossing at any point on the river.
Clearly, good grossing points would have been used, but it is not possible to know where these points
would have been.

126

return journey to the settlement. This method for compensating for the return journey
is imperfect, however. It has been proven that moving downhill is easier until a specific slope threshold is reached, after which it becomes more difficult (e.g. Langmuir
1984 and Aitken 1977). This makes travel time dependent upon the direction of travel.
Given the large number of other factors influencing the travel time (e.g. no load going
one way but a load coming back, adverse weather conditions, or the health of the traveller) that cannot be known, this problem becomes relatively insignificant. As shown
in Fig. 5.151 on page 320, a distance of 4.90 km is indicated as taking 2.22 hours. This
works out to only 2.21 km/hr but when the distance is doubled to compensate for the
return journey, it becomes 4.42 km/hr which is consistent with figures suggested by
Bohannon (1997, 15) for comfortable walking speeds (see Figure 5.9).

127

5.4.3

Slope

Slope is a primary suitability factor for agricultural land. Different crops, animals, and
farming strategies all affect the threshold of maximum slope for specific agricultural
application. Slope, a term typically defined as Rise
Run , is also commonly used for hillslope,
and can be expressed as a percentage. Slope can also be expressed in terms of degrees
(dg), which relates to the geometric angle of the incline. Degrees have been used
throughout this thesis to describe hillslope5.4 .
Traditional assumptions are that basic field management strategies begin changing
(to solutions like terracing) when slopes rise to 10◦ - 15◦ (Wagstaff and Gamble 1982,
101) (Whitelaw 1991, 405) (Wagstaff 1992, 155). Recent GIS work conducted on the
island of Kythera by Bevan and Conolly (2002, 127) is in accordance with these values
given above, while van Joolen (2003, 28) considered land suitable for farming to be
0-14◦ (manual cultivation) and 0-7.4◦ (cultivation with light ploughs). In the absence of
access to detailed data relating to the land surrounding Shuna, such as the distributions
of soil types, and information about the effects of long term erosion, slope remains the
most appropriate way to classify land suitability in this case . Based on the above
(and also on my personal experience gained from 20 years of farming) land up to 9◦ is
classified in the model as suitable for growing crops, while land up to 15◦ is considered
suitable for grazing by animals. Slope values were generated in GRASS using 30m
ASTER data from NASA, producing a raster file. This raster file was then converted
into two binary raster masks where:
• slopes of less than or equal to 9◦ are set to 1 and the remainder of the raster is set
to zero

• slopes of less than or equal to 15◦ are set to 1 and the remainder of the raster is
set to zero

The two binary rasters can then be used as masks for land suitability when creating the
catchments in Landuse Analyst.
Table 5.1: Slope limits (after van Joolen (2003, 28))

Suitable
Marginally suitable
Limited

Manual Cultivation

Cultivation w/ light ploughs

0-25% (0-14◦ )

0-13% (0-7.4◦ )
13-55% (7.4 - 28.8◦ )
55-100% (28.8 - 45◦ )

25-55% (14 - 28.8◦ )
55-100% (28.8-45◦ )

5.4

To convert degrees to percent slope, tan and arctan are used. Looking at 9◦ and 15◦ , tan 9 = 15.838%
and tan 15 = 26.795%. Similarly, arctan 15.838% = 8.999◦ and arctan 26.795% = 15.000◦ .

128

5.4.4

Diet

Each of the three chronological periods being examined as part of this thesis, the Chalcolithic, Early EB I and Late EB I have been explored separately when reconstructing
the relative proportions of each plant and animal to the diet. This short section describes how the archaeological evidence at Shuna is used to reconstruct the relative
contribution of animals and plants to the diet. Following this a more detailed account
is given of the palaeobotanical and faunal assemblages, and how they were used to
reconstruct the diet.
The contribution of plants to the diet is determined by implication after calculating
the contribution from animal products (as described in Section 4.2.1 on page 58). This
therefore requires the total contribution from animals to be determined. Isotopic analysis of human remains can indicate the relative contribution of animal products to an
individuals diet but is unable to discern between meat, blood or dairy products (Privat
et al. 2002, 61). This makes diet reconstruction difficult when trying to incorporate the
use of secondary products like dairy and blood, because the potential for production
of them depend upon the size of the herd, but does allow for the total animal contribution to be estimated. This was not possible to do at Shuna because although there
were a small number of infant burials (e.g. Baird and Philip 1994, 115, Philip and
Baird 1993, 12,17) from these periods the presence of human remains are otherwise
absent ruling out the use of isotopic analysis for even a general indication of animal
contribution. Given the lack of direct archaeological evidence at Shuna indicating the
levels of animal products in the diet, it has been necessary to use instead a range of
reasonable levels to reflect the probable proportion of meat in the prehistoric diet of
Shuna’s inhabitants. For the purposes of the model, the levels of 10%, 20%, & 30%
have been chosen which reflect primary product (i.e. meat) contribution only. Any secondary products (i.e. dairy and blood), are not included in this value because potential
dairy contribution is examined using values of 0 50 and 100% of the total potential
from the herd. Therefore, when examining the 0% contribution from dairy potential, it
would be redundant to have included it in the meat contribution values.
These levels have been chosen with the aid of ethnographic studies. For example,
Kramer (1982, 40) notes that one sheep will provide about 15 of a kg of meat per person
per day for 10-15 days, based on a household of seven adults, two adolescents, four
young children and two infants. Using these numbers, this is 15 people being fed for 15
days. People are modelled at a required 2500 calories per day, and in the model meat
from sheep provides 3500 calories per kg. 3500 · .2 = 700 calories per day from meat.
700
2500 = 28%, which I have taken as a high value for meat content. Kramer (1982, 40)

does also note that she learned (from a personal communication) that families only kill
4-12 sheep/goats per year. 12 sheep for 15 days equals 180 days, or half a year that
meat was being eaten on the high end of her estimate. This would effectively halve
129

the 28% figure to 14% meat contribution. If, however, only 4 are killed a year, that
means only 4.7% of the caloric requirements per person is met from meat. As there
was also potential for meat from other sources (hunting, fishing), the values of 10, 20
and 30% contribution to diet are being presented as acceptable values to use for use in
the model.
Having justified the levels of 10% 20% and 30% for meat contribution and the
levels of 0, 50% and 100% for utilisation of dairy production potential, the details of
the palaeobotanical and faunal records follow5.5 .

5.5

Plant Exploitation

Plant remains are well documented in the archaeological record at Shuna. The primary
crops grown at Shuna (einkorn, emmer, barley, lentil, and bitter vetch) are typically/traditionally sown in autumn, flower in late winter to early spring, and are ready to
harvest in early summer (Abbo et al. 2003, 436). Based on Holden, (forthcoming)
the presence of plants in the 3 chronological periods under consideration have been
summarised. The relative proportions at which these crop seeds have been recorded
during each chronological phase of the site’s inhabitation have been used to estimate
the likely total crop contribution (Figure 5.10). If a species contributed less than 0.5%
to the diet it was added to a similar species which was over 0.5%. The crops in the
model have been readjusted according to their relative calorific values and actual proportions as recovered from the archaeological record. For example, peas have a food
value of 3.25 MCals/kg olives are 4 MCals/kg, and the rest of the crops are 3 MCals/kg.
A simple example of how this was done is if there was one seed from emmer and one
pea seed in the assemblage, the emmer would contribute not 50% (as would happen if
3
food value was ignored) but rather 3+3.25
= 48%. If it was one olive, one pea and one
3
3.25
emmer, the results would be emmer= 3+3.25+4
= 29% and pea= 3+3.25+4
= 32% and
4
olive= 3+3.25+4
= 39%.

One interesting note to make is that the use of dung as fuel can make a difference on
the interpretation of a crop’s contribution to the diet. Seeds contained in the dung, at
first thought, should be a reflection of the plants that lie within walking distance of the
core settlement, as they would have wandered out to collect their fuel... but this is not
necessarily the case because what could have been happening is shepherds could have
been picking dung up in distant pastures, as the opportunity presented itself, packing
it with them and bringing it back to the settlement and using it as fuel, or treating
5.5

Over the course of this research, having consulted many different pieces of literature, interviewing
many ranchers and farmers from Australia and Canada, and combining my own personal experiences and
knowledge from living on a mixed farm for 20+ years to arrive at the values used to define the crops and
animals. The values have been found (unsurprisingly) to be remarkably consistent. Three examples from
the thousands of available resources are (Danti 2000, Chapter 2), (Bhattacharyal and Harb 1973, 268)
and online sources such as http://www.sheep101.info/201/ewerepro.html

130

Horse Bean

Einkorn

Emmer

Lentils

Peas

Olives

Grapes

Bitter Vetch

Barley

Period
Chalcolithic
Early EB I
Late EB I

1.09
.52
-

5.47
1.54
11.79

52.52
44.11
46.66

1.09
31.8
4.13

3.28
3.59
-

1.53
3.58
6.15

8.2
15.38

2.19
.51
-

32.83
6.15
15.89

Figure 5.10: Breakdown of primary crops contributing to the domestic crop portion of the inhabitants’ of Shuna’s diet, as a percent of the total.

131

it as a commodity for exchange. They would not have been picking up fresh dung,
but rather the dung that has been baking in the sun for some time so that it is dried
and able to be burned. If all the shepherds did that all the time it would result in an
effective dung collection system. The contents of the dung, as charred remains found
at the site, might not be a reflection of what is actually at the site but what is available
to the animals throughout the entire grazing catchment area. Furthermore, depending
on the time of the year this will vary. If they were grazing the fallow land, the animals
would have more access to the grains of the crop that has been grown, harvested ,
dropped, wasted, and so on, resulting in a higher content of domesticates. This could
also happen if they were foddering the animals, so as evidence of foddering, it could be
useful to look at the charred remains of suspected dung fuel because, if it was used as
fuel, quite likely a relationship might emerge between foddering and charred remains
of domestic crops. Looking more for barley and bitter vetch, not wheat, particularly if
there were a lot of cattle because cattle cannot eat wheat, as it causes them to bloat,
and is often fatal. Cattle provide very good dung for fuel, the caprine dung less suitable
(although still useable). So depending on the period (for example LEBI if we see high
cattle population in the record) if we see a lot of charred crop grains it might be an
indication that they were being foddered.
In the following discussion, the breakdown for the contribution of crops in the Chalcolithic, EEBI and LEBI is presented. These are a direct representation of the proportion
of carbonised seed in the palaeobotanical assemblages for each period. Whilst this is
unlikely to be a direct reflection of the precise proportion of such species produced in a
given year at Shuna, or consumed in any particular year, given preservation biases and
inter-annual variability seems likely to give a reasonable approximation of the relative
significance of these main crop species to the domestic crop portion of the settlement’s
diet. For a breakdown of the specific values used for defining the crops in Landuse
Analyst, see Table E.1 on page 593.

5.5.1

Chalcolithic

In the Chalcolithic, Emmer constituted over 52% of the crop production. Together with
barley (nearly 33%) these two crops alone represent ∼85% of the total production,

making them immensely important crops in this period. Einkorn is 5.47% and may
have been either grown separately, or have remained persistent in the fields of emmer
unintentionally as they are both wheat varieties (either way, this makes no difference
in the model or it’s calculations as they have the same basic characteristics). Peas were
the next most important at only 3.28% and they are not of particular relevance when
it comes to affecting the final outcome of the model. Peas, however, are legumous, and
could be relevant in other ways, for example, in ensuring soil sustainability, or effort
required for their production. These factors are not incorporated into Landuse Analyst,
132

but will be in future versions (see Chapter 7).
Notably, there were no grape pips found dating to the Chalcolithic, and olives only
1.53%. This becomes of interest later, when the results of the modelling show that
there was very little cropland utilised in the hills.

5.5.2

Early EB I

In the EEBI, Emmer constituted over 44% of the crop production. Together with Lentils
(nearly 32%) these two crops alone represent ∼76% of the total production, making
them the two most important crops in this period. Lentils are a legumous crop, and
the increase in production may have been a result of ‘lessons learned’ from previously
successful use of peas in the Chalcolithic. Einkorn production dropped from 5.47% (in
the Chalcolithic) to a mere 1.54% in the EEBI, and barley dropped drastically to a mere
6.15%. Peas remained at roughly the same level (3.59%) as the Chalcolithic (3.28%).
Grapes are now found, and represent 8.2%, and olive production increased to 3.58%
(more than doubling the Chalcolithic level of 1.53%).
This increase in viticulture and olives is reflected in the model results being presented later in this chapter, with more cropland being indicated in the hills, which
provide a suitable environment for both plants.
Holden, (forthcoming) notes that some animal dung appears to be present in Area
A Phase 5, which is important because dung could have been the source of some of the
seeds present in the assemblage. In this case, he suggests that dung could in fact be the
source for some of the small legume seeds as well.

5.5.3

Late EB I

In the LEBI, Emmer was still the crop of primary importance, constituting over 46%
of the crop total. The importance of Grapes increased drastically in the LEBI, jumping
from 8.2% in the EEBI to 15.38%, which is nearly identically important to the Barley,
which is 15.89% (a rise from 6.15% in the EEBI). Einkorn regained popularity (seemingly), jumping from 1.54% in the EEBI to 11.79% in the LEBI . Lentils went from a
crop of importance to a low 4.13% level. The focus seems to have shifted away from
legumes now, which could potentially have been a bad decision with respect to taking
the nitrogen fixing legumes out of the crop rotation.
As peas and lentils are nitrogen fixers, the move away from these plants could have
had accelerated soil depletion. If the legumes were just coincidentally grown in higher
numbers in the EEBI, and helped to sustain the soil, and were abandoned without
knowing that they helped prevent soil depletion, this move away from these crops in the
LEBI could have led to the disastrous situation whereby the land became depleted and
crops failed. If, in fact, the land was in danger of over exploitation, different methods
would have been available to avoid this. Longer fallow times in the crop rotation, for
133

example, can help combat this (Campbell 2009, 89-94), but would as a result increase
the area of cropland required to sustain production levels. If other contemporary sites
in the region were already utilising the arable land that this increase required, problems
could have arisen politically, unless trade (either land or produce) arrangements were
made. This type of exploration is presented in more detail in Chapter 6.

5.5.4

General Observations

Holden seems to attribute charred seeds from domesticates such as cereals and legumes
to losses during food preparation, while the “...bulk of the wild species encountered
may have derived from the burning of animal dung as domestic fuel” (Holden, forthcoming). This position seems to preclude the notion that the people could have been
foddering the animals, which, if it were the case, could also explain the charred domesticate seeds. The possibility for animals being foddered is considered in the model by
calculating 18 otherwise identical scenarios both with and without foddering factored
in.
Regarding weed seeds, there are clear changes in the assemblage between the Chalcolithic and the EB I. Rye grass (Lolium sp.) and Scorpius muricatus was present in
the Chalcolithic assemblage, but missing in the EB I where it is replaced with small
legumes. The ecological zones which Townsend and Guest (1974) suggests Scorpius
muricatus is well suited for are found in a number of areas in close proximity to Shuna
“making detailed interpretation essentially impossible” (Croft, forthcoming). Townsend
and Guest (1974) does comment that this plant is highly valued for grazing sheep. This
is important because if this was the case at Shuna it supports the idea of the weed seeds
coming from animal dung being used as fuel. Holden, (forthcoming) suggests that this
evidence, plus the fact that there is a fairly narrow range of species in the assemblage,
indicates selective grazing of certain species and/or specific ecological zone preferences. This is important, because if this is the case then “... the observed decline in
Lolium grains and the increase in small legume seeds must reflect changes in grazing
patterns” (Holden, forthcoming). The implications of this include influences on the
times of year animals are being grazed close to the settlement and/or the different
zones which they are being allowed to use for grazing (Holden, forthcoming). This
information, when considered along with the apparent chronological trend between
the Chalcolithic and the EB I could be an indicator of a fundamental change in land
management.

5.6

Animal Exploitation

The animal remains are well documented for Shuna. These animals and their relative
portion of the total domestic meat contribution are shown in Figure 5.12. A proposed
134

annual cycle for caprine and crop production is shown in Figure 5.11. Using the land
at different times of the year could mean different relationships with it.
All of the models are showing significant locations of the crop lands in the alluvial
valley bottom and the crop land, if you look at it in terms of an annual cycle, requires
a lot of activity during harvest, sowing time, and at ploughing/weeding time (midOctober to mid-Jun generally, and more concentrated communal effort required in the
1st and last 30 days of this period for sowing and harvest). These areas, in use for
intensive, cultivated cropping, would would have been very busy and had a high human
presence, particularly so during these specific times of the year.
It would also be interesting to examine where caprines and cattle herds might be
while lactating, as this could provide insight into dairy use. For example, in the proposed timeline, the full availability of dairy products roughly coincides with the harvesting and processing of harvested crops. This would be beneficial, as the lactating
animals could have been given access to the just harvested fields, close to the settlement (in comparison with the further off pastures). The added complexity timelines
add to the model is largely beyond the scope of this research, but presents an excellent
opportunity for further development in future work.
The breakdown (Croft, forthcoming) for the three periods have been summarised,
like the crops, into their relative portion to the total contribution calculated (See Figure 5.12). Each animal has also been adjusted to account for differing body size
(weight) before determining their final overall contribution to the people’s diet using the built in conversion feature of Landuse Analysis (see Section D.3 on page D.3).
). There is a huge amount of data available with respect to physical characteristics and
requirements of sheep, goats, pigs and cattle. For a breakdown of the specific values
used for defining the animals in Landuse Analyst, see Table F.1 on page 595.

5.6.1

Chalcolithic

Cattle were the biggest domestic contributor to the meat portion of the diet in the
Chalcolithic period at 47.81% and pigs accounted for an additional 36.65%, for a combined total of 84.46%. Caprines contributed a mere 15.54% (Sheep 3.59% and Goats
11.95%). An interesting observation one can make in this period is the relative importance of pigs. Pigs do not contribute to the production of dairy products, and are
therefore only useful (food-wise) as meat. This suggests a rather ‘meaty’ diet was likely
in this period. The mere presence of cattle however suggests to me that the potential
dairy products might make to diet need to be examined. For this reason, dairy production potential has been explored at using utilisation levels (of total possible production)
of 0%, 50% and 100%. These levels correspond to no dairy products being used, half
the potential dairy available from the herd being used, and total 100% exploitation and
utilisation of dairy production potential being used. This is repeated for the EEBI and
135

Figure 5.11: Proposed Annual Timeline

136

Nov 1

Dec 1

Jul 1

Oct 1

Jan 1

Feb 1

Apr 1

May 1

Aug 1

Sep 1

Aug 1 – Sep 30

Mar 1

Breeding

Average age for weaning is 60 days

Aug 1 – Sep 30

Oct 1

Decreasing Dairy Availability

Mar 1 – Apr 30

Weaning

Mar 1 – Apr 30

Gestation time of 150 days for caprines

Sep 1

Aug 1 – Feb 28

Gestating

Aug 1

Jan 1 – Apr 30

Jun 1

Jul 1

Eating Culled Adults

May 1 – Jul 31

May 1 – Dec 31
Full Dairy Availability

Increasing Dairy Availability

Jun 1

Jun 15 – Aug 15

Processing of harvest

Eating Yearly Offspring

May 1

Jan 1 – Feb 28

Apr 1

May 15 – Jun 15

Harvest

Birthing

Caprines can lactate for about 210 days

Jan 1 – Sep 30

Lactating Mothers

Mar 1

Feb 1

Nov 1

Jan 1

Feb 15 – Mar 31

Oct 15 – Nov 15

Dec 1

Flowering

Sowing

Weed control, etc.

Nov 16 – May 14

Maintenance

Nov 1

Nov 1

Dec 1

Dec 1

Jan 1

Jan 1

Caprine Herd Timeline

Crop Timeline

Period
Chalcolithic
Early EB I
Late EB I

Sheep
3.59
12.26
5.92

Pig
36.65
39.62
5.63

Cow
47.81
37.74
78.87

Goat
11.95
10.38
9.58

Figure 5.12: Breakdown of the animals contributing to the domestic meat portion of the inhabitants’ of Shuna’s diet, as a percent of the total.

LEBI as well.

5.6.2

Early EB I

Pigs were the biggest domestic contributor to the meat portion of the diet in the EEBI
period at 39.62% and cattle accounted for an additional 37.74%, for a combined total
of 77.36%. Caprines contributed a more significant amount of 22.64% (Sheep 12.26%
and Goats 10.38%) than in the Chalcolithic. Again, the very large dietary portion being
provided by pig (meat) seems to suggest that the people of EEBI Shuna had a rather
‘meaty’ diet. A decrease in cattle and increase in sheep, however, may indicate that
secondary products from caprines were gaining importance. The potential for dairy
products is shown later in this chapter to be rather significant, even though pigs still
had such a big representation in the faunal assemblage. The increased population of
Shuna in the EEBI could have been supported through an increased utilisation of dairy
products. Also in this period, animal foddering is shown (later in the chapter) to begin
137

making a significant difference in landscape engagement/impact. This significance is
due largely to the increased population. As in the Chalcolithic, dairy is to be modeled
at 0%, 50% and 100% utilisation of production potential.

5.6.3

Late EB I

Cattle were by far the biggest domestic contributor to the meat portion of the diet in the
LEBI period at 78.87%. Pigs (which may include a significant proportion of boar, pers.
com. Doug Baird) accounted for a meagre 5.63%, a very significant shift from the previous two periods. Caprines contributed 15.5% (Sheep 5.92% and Goats 9.58%). In the
LEBI, dairy almost certainly had to have had an increase in importance from, if not the
EEBI, then definitely the Chalcolithic. The almost complete loss of pigs in the assemblage coupled with the near doubling of cattle is indicative of dairy and traction. The
problem with dropping pigs as a meat source is that pigs are (relatively) small animals,
which can be grown and slaughtered at shorter intervals than cattle, so to keep animal
products a regular part of the diet, pigs were well suited, but cattle are not, as the
animals are much larger and there was no convenient way of preserving the meat for
extended periods (some ethnographic studies have indicated preservation techniques,
such as storing the meat in lard or sun drying (Kramer 1982).The incorporation of
dairy products, however, could easily have filled this void in the diet. Foddering dairy
producing animals would have been a benefit, and although that would have required
additional crop land, that could have been combated with the increased number of cattle available for use as traction to plough, which increases the efficiency of farming. As
in the Chalcolithic and EEBI, dairy is to be modelled at 0%, 50% and 100% utilisation
of production potential.

5.6.4

General Observations

Perhaps the most significant chronological change seen in the assemblage is the move
away from pigs to cattle. By the LEBI, pigs went from being of major importance to the
smallest contributor. This shift can be interpreted in many ways, but one possibility for
consideration is a possible increase of reliance on dairy products. If reliance on dairy
did occur, the need for pigs (which contribute only meat) would likely have decreased.
In addition to dairy products, which can be obtained from both caprines and cattle, cattle offer the added benefit of traction, adding increased efficiency to crop production.
This increase in crop production would have made supplemental feeding of animals
with crop products (fodder and grain) more feasible. A scenario like this affects landuse, and results in an increased area of intensively farmed land, and reduced areal
requirements for grazing. As discussed in upcoming Section 5.8, beginning on page
315, this does not drastically alter the overall footprint range, but does affect the ratio
between crop land and grazing land and thus to environmental impact. This scenario
138

is further made feasible when the archaeological evidence is introduced. There was in
fact a decrease of pig bones in the assemblage from the Chalcolithic to the LEBI, and
cattle did become much more prominent (see Figure B.1). Mortality rates for caprines
and cattle also shift slightly, indicating a possibly more dairy focussed herd during the
EB I than was seen in the Chalcolithic (Croft, forthcoming).

5.7

Model Results

Thirty six permutations of the input variables for each period were chosen which provide combinations of acceptable values for population, meat content, utilisation of potential dairy products, and foddering of animals. Population values reflect minimum
and maximum estimates. For each of these population levels, 18 scenarios are modelled. Meat levels of 10 20 and 30% each are modelled. Each of these 3 meat levels are
modelled using a 0 50 and 100% dairy product potential level. Each of these 18 scenarios are also modelled using fodder for animals as either happening or not. This results
in 36 scenarios for each period and are presented in 108 charts that incorporate the
resultant maps. Furthermore, each map lists the crop/grazing land areas and extents
(in time) resulting from each of the modelled landuse scenarios. Each chart presents
scenarios for varied diet composition, dairy contribution, animal feeding information,
calculations, diet contribution, herd sizes, and more. In order to present all of this
information in a useful manner, the following strategy has been implemented.
The charts, as well as showing all relevant input factors and resultant calculations,
also include the final map generated by the modelling software (Landuse Analyst).
These charts are presented in six groups of six, with each group followed by a description of and interpretation of the group. The groups of six were chosen to illustrate the
influence of two input variables, namely:
• exploitation of potential secondary animal products (dairy) [0%,50%,100%]
• animal diet supplements (derived from the crops which were sown) [none, 90days]
For ease of reference, the scenarios have been numbered 1 to 36 (see Table 5.2) and
grouped together as illustrated in Table 5.3. The levels used for dairy were chosen to
illustrate the influence of dairy utilisation. In order to see the most extreme affect that
dairy can have on the model output, 0% and 100% utilisation of potential production
is modelled; to see a more modest scenario, a 50% utilisation of production potential
is also included. As explained in Chapter 4 (Section 4.2.2 on page 59) the production
potential is based on herd sizes generated to be able to sustain meat production levels
at the levels required by the settlement in each different scenario.
The method chosen for modelling animal foddering is a conservative one. The
details are:
139

Table 5.2: Model Scenarios
Scenario

Pop’n

Meat%

Dairy%

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

Min
Min
Min
Min
Min
Min
Max
Max
Max
Max
Max
Max
Min
Min
Min
Min
Min
Min

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
20
20
20
20
20
20

0
0
50
50
100
100
0
0
50
50
100
100
0
0
50
50
100
100

Foddered

Scenario

Pop’n

Meat%

Dairy%

19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

Max
Max
Max
Max
Max
Max
Min
Min
Min
Min
Min
Min
Max
Max
Max
Max
Max
Max

20
20
20
20
20
20
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30

0
0
50
50
100
100
0
0
50
50
100
100
0
0
50
50
100
100

Foddered

Table 5.3: Model Scenario Sets
Set

Scenarios

Population

Meat Contribution

1
2
3
4
5
6

1-6
7-12
13-18
19-24
25-30
31-36

Min
Max
Min
Max
Min
Max

10%
10%
20%
20%
30%
30%

• the sources of the fodder are combined to include both the chaff/straw and the
actual grain (product of the harvest)

• barley alone is used as the source for the above
• the only animals to receive fodder are gestating females
• animals receiving fodder only do so for 90 days
This combination of factors is conservative enough to be feasible, but significant
enough to indicate the effect that foddering can have on landuse engagement. After
the six groups have been presented, the maps are regrouped into four sets of nine
(Table 5.4) to illustrate the affect of both primary and secondary animal products (i.e.
the meat level in the diet and the contribution of dairy). Each grouping is accompanied
with observations.

140

Table 5.4: Scenario Groupings
Group 1
1
13
25

3
15
27

Group 2

5
17
29

2
14
26

Group 3
7
19
31

9
21
33

4
16
28

6
18
30

Group 4

11
23
35

8
20
32

141

10
22
34

12
24
36

5.7.1

Chalcolithic Results

142

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
90.00%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
156
36

Crops

73913
16890
90,802

Animals

9,034

Crops Human
Crops Animal

0

Max. Mcals Dairy
Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

10,898
17,532
6,634 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

61.88%
24.17%
5.47%
8.48%

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

90

200

79

175

0%

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

100%
10%

ALL Meat %

days

90

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

150

68
82

29

9% 10%
0%

10%

125

56

81%

90%

45

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

Dairy
Crops

100

27

34

3

75

9034

Dairy

0

Wild Meat

91

Crops

50

23

73913

Wild Plants

8213
0

20,000

40,000

60,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

78

80,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

17

11

25

0

0

100

4.00

75

2.67

50
1.33
0

4
1
15

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

192
82

9

25
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

8
2

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.13: Scenario1:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 10%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 0%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

143

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
90.00%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
158
0

Crops

73913
0
73,913

Animals

9,034

Crops Human
Crops Animal

0

Max. Mcals Dairy
Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
10,337
10,337 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

80.07%
19.93%
0.00%
0.00%

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

0%

ALL Meat %

10%

150

200

131

175

113

150

100%

days

0

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

9% 10%
0%

10%

94

75

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

Dairy
Crops

125

4
1

100

15

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet

56

3

75

9034

Dairy

0

Wild Meat

91

Crops

35

50

38

73913

Wild Plants

8213
0

20,000

40,000

60,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

78

80,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes
100

3.00

19

25

0

0

21

75

2.00

50
1.00
0

49

38

81%

90%

Domestic Meat

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

158
106

25
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

12
Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

8
2

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.14: Scenario2:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 10%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 0%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

144

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
85.25%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
148
36

Crops

70008
16890
86,898

Animals

9,034

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

4,338

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

10,898
16,986
6,088 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

62.93%
23.11%
5.47%
8.48%

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit
ALL Meat %

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

90

200

79

175

68

150

50%
100%
10%
days

90

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

30

80

9% 10%
5%
0%

5%
10%

125

56

85%

77%
100

45

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

4
1

Dairy
Crops

14
28

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

9034

Dairy

4338

Wild Meat

91

Crops

3

75

50

7779
0

20,000

40,000

60,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

80,000

74

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

17

11

25

0

0

100

4.00

75

2.67

50
1.33
0

34

23

70008

Wild Plants

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

184
84

9

25
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

8
2

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.15: Scenario3:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 10%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 50%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

145

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
85.25%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
150
0

Crops

70008
0
70,008

Animals

9,034

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

4,338

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
9,791
9,791 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

50%

ALL Meat %

10%

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

150

150

131

131

100%

46

days

0

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

113

9% 10%
5%
0%

5%
10%

81.13%
18.87%
0.00%
0.00%

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

150
108

94

113

4
1

94

14

85%

39

77%

75

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

9034

Dairy

4338

Wild Meat

36
38

70008

Wild Plants

74

38

7779
0

20,000

40,000

60,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

80,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes
100

3.00

19

19

0

0

21

75

2.00

50
1.00
0

56

56

91

Crops

75

Dairy
Crops

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

3

25
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

12

8
2

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.16: Scenario4:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 10%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 50%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

146

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
80.49%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
140
36

Crops

66104
16890
82,994

Animals

9,034

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

8,676

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

10,898
16,440
5,542 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

63.99%
22.06%
5.47%
8.48%

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

ALL Meat %

99%

30

8676

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

56

125

45

100

4
1
34

13

75

2

50

23

7345
0

17,500

35,000

52,500

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

70,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

17

11

69

25

100

4.00

75

2.67

9

25
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

50
1.33
0

150

28

66104

Wild Plants

68

Dairy
Crops

91

Crops

175

77

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet

Wild Meat

79

72%

Meat Mcal

9034

200

days

Domestic Animal Contribution

80%

Dairy

90

10%
90

8% 10%
10%
0%

Domestic Meat

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

Dairy Utilisation 100%
100%
Dairy Limit

10%
10%

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

175
85

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

7
1

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.17: Scenario5:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 10%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 100%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

147

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
80.49%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
141
0

Crops

66104
0
66,104

Animals

9,034

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

8,676

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
9,245
9,245 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

82.18%
17.82%
0.00%
0.00%

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

150

150

131

131

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Dairy Utilisation 100%
100%
Dairy Limit
ALL Meat %

10%

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

141
109

days

0

43

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

8% 10%
10%
0%

10%
10%

113

113

94

94
4
1
39

80%

13

72%
75

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

9034

Dairy

8676

Wild Meat

36
69

7345
0

17,500

35,000

52,500

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

70,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes
100

3.00

19

19

0

0

22

75

2.00

50
1.00
0

38

38

66104

Wild Plants

75

56

56

91

Crops

2

Dairy
Crops

25
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

12
Sheep Pig

Adults

7
1

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.18: Scenario6:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 10%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 100%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

148

(a) Scenario 1 - Meat 10%
Min. Population 100
Foddered, Dairy 0%

(b) Scenario 3 - Meat 10%
Min. Population 100
Foddered, Dairy 50%

(c) Scenario 5 - Meat 10%
Min. Population 100
Foddered, Dairy 100%

(d) Scenario 2 - Meat 10%
Min. Population 100
Not Foddered, Dairy 0%

(e) Scenario 4 - Meat 10%
Min. Population 100
Not Foddered, Dairy 50%

(f) Scenario 6 - Meat 10%
Min. Population 100
Not Foddered, Dairy 100%

Figure 5.19: Set 1: Minimum Population, Meat 10%, Chalcolithic Comparison between results looking at the difference supplemental feeding of animals makes. Dark green represents crop
land, light green grazing land.
(a) Crop (extent=22.1 minutes, area=192 Ha), Grazing (extent=25.7 minutes, area=82 Ha)
(b) Crop (extent=21.5 minutes, area=184 Ha), Grazing (extent=25.4 minutes, area=84 Ha)
(c) Crop (extent=20.8 minutes, area=175 Ha), Grazing (extent=24.9 minutes, area=85 Ha)
(d) Crop (extent=19.5 minutes, area=158 Ha), Grazing (extent=25 minutes, area=106 Ha)
(e) Crop (extent=18.9 minutes, area=150Ha), Grazing (extent=24.7 minutes, area=108 Ha)
(f) Crop (extent=18.2 minutes, area=141 Ha), Grazing (extent=24.4 minutes, area=109 Ha)

Set 1 (Figure 5.19) considers the effect of animal foddering for a minimum population of 100 people, for a 10% meat level and dairy levels of 0%, 50% and 100%.
Scenarios 1, 3 and 5 are assuming the animals were foddered; Scenarios 2, 4 and 6 are
assuming the animals were not foddered.
Minimal variance in both the footprint size and crop land to grazing land ratio is
evident. There is an increase in grazing land area from [82, 84, 85] ha to [106, 108, 109]
ha when animals are not given supplemental feed. The increase of 128.24% (values
from Figures 5.19c and 5.19f ❀ 109
85 = 128.24%) , although seemingly significant, only
affects the difference in extent by 2.1 minutes (values from Figures 5.19c and 5.19f
❀ ||(24.9 − 20.8)| − |(24.4 − 18.2)|| = 2.1).

The number of adult cattle in scenarios 1-6 is 15, as is shown in Figures 5.13 to
149

5.18 (pages 143 to 148). The area of cropland in these scenarios ranges from 141 to
192 ha. Thus, if the adult cattle were being utilised for traction, there would be from
9.4 to 12.8 ha of land for every adult member of the herd.
The contribution of dairy to the overall diet for Scenarios 3, 4, 5, 6 is 5%, 5%, 10%,
10% leaving plants responsible for supplying 85%, 85%, 80%, 80% of the overall diet.
Scenarios 1-6 indicate that large scale environmental impact is unlikely to have
occurred. Given the very small area of land required for crop production and the vast
amount of available arable land in the valley, it is possible, perhaps even likely, that the
land being used would have been less clustered around the site. This would result in
a less densely used crop area, lowering the effects of intensive landuse associated with
cultivation.
Similarly, the same can be said regarding pasture land. This set of scenarios would
likely have seen more grazing in the hills, as shepherds would have taken their herds
to wherever food was available. In these small scenarios, the model produces fewer
grazing area choices (here almost exclusively in the valley bottom), and is thus less
likely to accurately reflect actual areas which would have been in use throughout the
year from season to season.
This principle also applies to the cropland, as the areas preferred by olives (and
in later periods vine crops) would have far more likely been on top of the eastern
escarpments in the hills rather than (as indicated) primarily in the valley. Although
there is some land being indicated as used on the slope, it is possible that there would
have been more land used in the hills than shown, specifically for growing these crops.
Landuse Analyst does have the capability to designate each crop (and animal)
unique physiographical criteria, but for the purposes of this thesis, it was intentionally
not used in order to keep things less complicated by using just one suitability factor
(slope) for all crops. The effect of having done this, although possibly slightly inaccurate for the small catchments, is almost unnoticeable once catchment areas get larger,
as the increased areas are far more likely to encapsulate the desired specialised areas
designated for the crop (or animal) anyway.
The faunal records for Shuna in the Chalcolithic indicate that there was a fairly high
amount of interest in meat, evidenced by the high portion of pig remains in the assemblage (see Table 5.10 on page 319). The effect of dairy utilisation in these scenarios is
essentially nil. This is important to note, because as the analysis continues and larger
population levels are modelled, the effect of dairy utilisation on landuse will become
more pronounced.
With these scenarios, the catchments are small, and are unlikely to have had much
impact on the landscape. Travel through the valley would have been largely unaffected
by the presence of the settlement, and dense heavy utilisation of land would not have
been necessary because of the vast amount of other available nearby arable land.
150

151

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

90.00%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
938
209

Crops

443475
98758
542,233

Animals

54,203

Crops Human
Crops Animal

0

Max. Mcals Dairy
Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

63,434
104,093
40,660 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

61.57%
24.57%
5.42%
8.44%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

1500

438

1313

375

1125

313

938

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat
0%

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

100%
10%

ALL Meat %
Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

500

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

1,146
480

days

90

173

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

9% 10%
0%

10%

489

81%

90%

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Meat Mcal

Dairy
Crops
158

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat
Dairy
Wild Meat

188

90

0

16

49275
0

125,000

250,000

375,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

500,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

97

63

466

188

600

4.00

450

2.67

52

150
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

300
1.33
0

563

375

125

443475

Wild Plants

24
4

54203
548

Crops

750

250

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Sheep Pig

Adults

49
10

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.20: Scenario7:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 10%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 0%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

152

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

90.00%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
949
0

Crops

443475
0
443,475

Animals

54,203

Crops Human
Crops Animal

0

Max. Mcals Dairy
Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
62,023
62,023 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

79.65%
20.35%
0.00%
0.00%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

700

1000

613

875

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat
Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

0%

ALL Meat %

10%

100%

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

949
621

291

days

0

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

750

525
226

9% 10%
0%

10%

438

350

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

500

204

375

263

54203

Dairy

0

Wild Meat

548

Crops

250

175

443475

Wild Plants

466

49275
0

125,000

250,000

375,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

500,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

123

88

125

0

0

600

3.00

450

2.00

300
1.00
0

16

Dairy
Crops

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

625

90

81%

90%

24
4

68

150
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

Sheep Pig

Adults

49
10

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.21: Scenario8:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 10%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 0%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

153

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

85.25%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
888
209

Crops

420050
98758
518,807

Animals

54,203

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

26,028

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

63,434
100,817
37,383 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

62.64%
23.50%
5.42%
8.44%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

90%

Crop Contribution

ALL Meat %
Supplemental feed

1500

438

1313

375

1125

313

938

50%
100%
10%
176

days

90

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

9% 10%
5%
0%

5%
10%

85%

473

77%

750

250

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

Dairy
Crops
160

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

54203

Dairy

26028

Wild Meat

23
3
85
15
125

420050

Wild Plants

375

46672
0

125,000

250,000

375,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

500,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

99

63

188
441

600

4.00

450

2.67

53

150
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

300
1.33
0

563

188

548

Crops

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat
Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

500

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

1,096
489

Sheep Pig

Adults

46
9

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.22: Scenario9:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 10%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 50%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

154

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

85.25%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
899
0

Crops

420050
0
420,050

Animals

54,203

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

26,028

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
58,746
58,746 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

80.72%
19.28%
0.00%
0.00%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

700

900

613

788

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat
Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

50%

ALL Meat %

10%

100%

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

899
630

276

days

0

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

525

675

229

9% 10%
5%
0%

5%
10%

438

23
3

563

85

85%

77%
350

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

54203

Dairy

26028

Wild Meat

207

548

Crops

441

225

46672
0

125,000

250,000

375,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

500,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

125

88

113

0

0

600

3.00

450

2.00

300
1.00
0

338

263

175

420050

Wild Plants

450

Dairy
Crops

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

15

69

150
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

46
9

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.23: Scenario10:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 10%, Potential Dairy Utilisation = 50%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

155

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

80.49%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
838
209

Crops

396624
98758
495,382

Animals

54,203

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

52,057

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

63,434
97,541
34,107 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

63.72%
22.42%
5.42%
8.44%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

1500

438

1313

375

1125

313

938

Dairy Utilisation 100%
100%
Dairy Limit
ALL Meat %

10%

179

days

90

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

8% 10%
10%
0%

10%
10%

80%

72%
250

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

Dairy
Crops

54203

Dairy

52057

Wild Meat

22
3
80
125

396624

Wild Plants

14

375

44069
0

100,000

200,000

300,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

400,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

101

188

63
417

600

4.00

450

2.67

54

150
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

300
1.33
0

750

563

188

548

Crops

458

163

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

500

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

1,046
497

Sheep Pig

Adults

43
9

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.24: Scenario11:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 10%, Potential Dairy Utilisation = 100%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

156

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

80.49%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
849
0

Crops

396624
0
396,624

Animals

54,203

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

52,057

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
55,470
55,470 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

81.80%
18.20%
0.00%
0.00%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

700

900

613

788

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Dairy Utilisation 100%
100%
Dairy Limit
ALL Meat %

10%

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

849
638

days

0

260

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

675

525
232

8% 10%
10%
0%

10%
10%

563

438
22
3

80%

80

72%
350

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

54203

Dairy

52057

Wild Meat

209

548

Crops

225
417

44069
0

100,000

200,000

300,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

400,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

126

88

113

0

0

600

3.00

450

2.00

300
1.00
0

450

338

263

175

396624

Wild Plants

14

Dairy
Crops

70

150
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

Sheep Pig

Adults

43
9

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.25: Scenario12:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 10%, Potential Dairy Utilisation = 100%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

157

(a) Scenario 7 - Meat 10%
Max. Population 600
Foddered, Dairy 0%

(b) Scenario 9 - Meat 10%
Max. Population 600
Foddered, Dairy 50%

(c) Scenario 11 - Meat 10%
Max. Population 600
Foddered, Dairy 100%

(d) Scenario 8 - Meat 10%
Max. Population 600
Not Foddered, Dairy 0%

(e) Scenario 10 - Meat 10%
Max. Population 600
Not Foddered, Dairy 50%

(f) Scenario 12 - Meat 10%
Max. Population 600
Not Foddered, Dairy 1000%

Figure 5.26: Set 2: Maximum Population, Meat 10% Chalcolithic Comparison between results
looking at the difference supplemental feeding of animals makes. Dark green represents crop land,
light green grazing land.
(a) Crop (extent=56 minutes, area=1146 Ha),Grazing (extent=64.4 minutes, area=480 Ha)
(b) Crop (extent=54.7 minutes, area=1096 Ha),Grazing (extent=63.8 minutes, area=489 Ha)
(c) Crop (extent=53.4 minutes, area=1046 Ha),Grazing (extent=63.1 minutes, area=497 Ha)
(d) Crop (extent=50.8 minutes, area=949 Ha), Grazing (extent=63.8 minutes, area=621 Ha)
(e) Crop (extent=49.5 minutes, area=899 Ha), Grazing (extent=63.1 minutes, area=630 Ha)
(f) Crop (extent=48.2 minutes, area=849 Ha), Grazing (extent=61.8 minutes, area=638 Ha)

Set 2 (Figure 5.26) considers the effect of animal foddering for a maximum population of 600 people, for a 10% meat level and dairy levels of 0%, 50% and 100%.
Scenarios 7, 9 and 11 are assuming the animals were foddered; Scenarios 8, 10 and 12
are assuming the animals were not foddered.
Minimal variance in both the footprint size and crop land to grazing land ratio is evident. There is an increase in grazing land area from [480, 489, 497] ha to [621, 630, 638]
ha when animals are not given supplemental feed. The increase of 128.37% (values
from Figures 5.26c and 5.26f ❀ 639
499 = 128.37%), although seemingly significant, affects the difference in extent by only 26.7 minutes (values from Figures 5.26c and 5.26f
❀ ||(53.4 − 13.1)| − |(48.2 − 61.8)|| = 26.7).

The number of adult cattle in scenarios 7-12 is 85, as is shown in Figures 5.20 to
158

5.25 (pages 152 to 157). The area of cropland in these scenarios ranges from 849 to
1146 ha. Thus, if the adult cattle were being utilised for traction, there would be from
10.0 to 13.5 ha of land for every adult member of the herd.
The contribution of dairy to the overall diet for Scenarios 9, 10, 11, 12 is 5%, 5%,
10%, 10% leaving plants responsible for supplying 85%, 85%, 80%, 80% of the overall
diet.
Scenarios 7-12 produce unsurprisingly bigger zones (due to the increase in population from 100 to 600) but particularly noticeable is that the valley has provided the vast
majority of the crop land. In contrast to set 1 (Figure 5.19 on page 149), much more
of the eastern slopes are being used for cultivation and pasture in these scenarios. This
would provide a better variety of land to utilise and presumably olives (and later vine
crops) would be most significant in the eastern slopes. The Wadi Arab bottom lands
would have provided feeding areas for the significant number of pigs present in this
period.
The amount of crop land in these scenarios is of sufficient size to have affected
travel on the east side of the Jordan through the valley; people would have had to walk
closer to the river than the valley edge to not have their travel impacted by cultivated
land.
Foddering of animals results in very little difference in the ratio between crop land
and grazing land, nor does it affect the extent to which the Wadi was being used to
any degree. The grazing land now extends far enough east that it is incorporating the
tops of the escarpment which allows for the grazing to be divided into this different
ecological zone than that of the valley bottom. Generally these scenarios look like they
relied very heavily on crop production.

159

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
80.00%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
137
70

Crops

65700
33264
98,964

Animals

18,068

Crops Human
Crops Animal

0

Max. Mcals Dairy
Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

21,405
23,359
1,954 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

72.90%
13.20%
5.44%
8.46%

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

90%

Crop Contribution

300

175

263

150

225

125

188

0%

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit
ALL Meat %

100%
20%
days

90

8%

69

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

20%

20%
0%

80%

72%
150

100

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

Dairy
Crops

110
63

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

113

75

18068

Dairy

0

Wild Meat

183

Crops

50

65700

Wild Plants

7300
0

4
1
13

75

2
17,500

35,000

52,500

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

70,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

39

38

25

200

3.00

69

150

2.00

21

50
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

100
1.00
0

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

200

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

207
191

Sheep Pig

Adults

7
1

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.27: Scenario13:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 20%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 0%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

160

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
80.00%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
141
0

Crops

65700
0
65,700

Animals

18,068

Crops Human
Crops Animal

0

Max. Mcals Dairy
Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status
Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

0%

ALL Meat %

20%

8%

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

150

263

131

43

99%

225

113

20%
86

94

188
4
1
13

72%

75

150

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

2

Dairy
Crops

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

79

0

Wild Meat

183

Crops

69

7300
0

17,500

35,000

52,500

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

70,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

38

19

0

0

47

200

3.00

150

2.00

100
1.00
0

38

75

65700

Wild Plants

56

113

18068

Dairy

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

300

days

0

0%

80%

91.03%
8.97%
0.00%
0.00%

100%

Domestic Animal Contribution

20%

0
9,189
9,189 kg Surplus

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

141
239

50
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

26

7
1

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.28: Scenario14:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 20%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 0%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

161

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
70.49%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
121
69

Crops

57892
33264
91,155

Animals

18,068

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

8,676

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

21,405
22,267
862 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

73.97%
12.13%
5.44%
8.46%

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit
ALL Meat %

7%

200

200

175

175

150

150

100%
20%
days

90

70

99%

20%

20%

105
125

125

100

100

10%
0%
70%

Plants Mcal
Dairy

63%

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

Dairy
Crops
64

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

18068

Dairy

8676

Wild Meat

183

Crops

75

3
0

75

12
2
50

50

57892

Wild Plants

6432
0

15,000

30,000

45,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

60,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

39

25

61

25

200

3.00

150

2.00

21

50
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

100
1.00
0

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

50%

Domestic Animal Contribution

10%

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

190
194

Sheep Pig

Adults

6
1

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.29: Scenario15:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 20%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 50%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

162

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
70.49%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
124
0

Crops

57892
0
57,892

Animals

18,068

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

8,676

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
8,096
8,096 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

50%

ALL Meat %

20%

7%

99%

300

150

263

131

225

113

38

20%
87

10%
0%
63%

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

Dairy
Crops

18068

Dairy

8676

Wild Meat

183

Crops

56

75

38

80

15,000

30,000

45,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

61

60,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

38

19

0

0

48

200

3.00

150

2.00

100
1.00
0

113

6432
0

75

2

57892

Wild Plants

3
0
12

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

94

188

150

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

days

0

20%
70%

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

100%

Domestic Animal Contribution

10%

92.10%
7.90%
0.00%
0.00%

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

124
242

27

50
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

6
1

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.30: Scenario16:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 20%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 50%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

163

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
60.98%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
104
69

Crops

50083
33264
83,347

Animals

18,068

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

17,352

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

21,405
21,175
231 Deficit

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

75.04%
11.06%
5.44%
8.46%

Sheep
Cow
Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna
Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

ALL Meat %

20%

175

175

150

150

125

125

61%

99%

20%

19%

55%

99

0%

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

71

days

90

Domestic Animal Contribution

6%

Plants Mcal
Dairy

200

Dairy Utilisation 100%
100%
Dairy Limit

19%

20%

100

100

75

75

Dairy
Crops
65

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

18068

Dairy

17352

3
0

183

10

Wild Meat
Crops

50

50083

Wild Plants

2

50

5565
0

15,000

30,000

45,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

60,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

40

25

25
53

200

3.00

150

2.00

22

50
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

100
1.00
0

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

200

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

174
197

Sheep Pig

Adults

5
1

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.31: Scenario17:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 20%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 100%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

164

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
60.98%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
107
0

Crops

50083
0
50,083

Animals

18,068

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

17,352

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
7,004
7,004 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

ALL Meat %

150

263

131

225

113

188

94

20%
days

0

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

6%

20%
89

61%

19%

55%

33

0%
75

150

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

Dairy
Crops

3
0

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
!

113

18068
Dairy

10

56

2

80

17352

Wild Meat

183

Crops

38

75

50083

Wild Plants

5565
0

15,000

30,000

45,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

60,000

53

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

38

19

0

0

48

200

3.00

150

2.00

100
1.00
0

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

Dairy Utilisation 100%
100%
Dairy Limit

19%

20%

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

93.16%
6.84%
0.00%
0.00%

300

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

107
244

27

50
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

5
1

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.32: Scenario18:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 20%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 100%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

165

(a) Scenario 13 - Meat 20%
Min. Population 100
Foddered, Dairy 0%

(b) Scenario 15 - Meat 20%
Min. Population 100
Foddered, Dairy 50%

(c) Scenario 17 - Meat 20%
Min. Population 100
Foddered, Dairy 100%

(d) Scenario 14 - Meat 20%
Min. Population 100
Not Foddered, Dairy 0%

(e) Scenario 16 - Meat 20%
Min. Population 100
Not Foddered, Dairy 50%

(f) Scenario 18 - Meat 20%
Min. Population 100
Not Foddered, Dairy 100%

Figure 5.33: Set 3: Minimum Population, Meat 20%, Chalcolithic Comparison between results looking at the difference supplemental feeding of animals makes. Dark green represents crop
land, light green grazing land.
(a) Crop (extent=22.8 minutes, area=207 Ha), Grazing (extent=30.9 minutes, area=191 Ha)
(b) Crop (extent=22.1 minutes, area=190 Ha), Grazing (extent=30.6 minutes, area=194 Ha)
(c) Crop (extent=20.8 minutes, area=174 Ha), Grazing (extent=29.9 minutes, area=197 Ha)
(d) Crop (extent=18.2 minutes, area=141 Ha), Grazing (extent=30.6 minutes, area=239 Ha)
(e) Crop (extent=16.9 minutes, area=124 Ha), Grazing (extent=29.9 minutes, area=242 Ha)
(f) Crop (extent=15.6 minutes, area=107 Ha), Grazing (extent=29.3 minutes, area=244 Ha)

Set 3 (Figure 5.33) considers the effect of animal foddering for a minimum population of 100 people, for a 20% meat level and dairy levels of 0%, 50% and 100%.
Scenarios 13, 15 and 17 are assuming the animals were foddered; Scenarios 14, 16
and 18 are assuming the animals were not foddered.
Minimal variance in footprint size is evident. There is a visible disparity in the crop
land to grazing land ratio. The grazing land area needed increases from [191, 194, 197]
ha to [239, 242, 244] ha when animals are not given supplemental feed. The increase of
123.86% (values from Figures 5.33c and 5.33f ❀ 243
195 = 123.86%), although seemingly
significant, affects the difference in extent by only 4.6 minutes (values from Figures
5.33c and 5.33f ❀ ||(29.9 − 20.8)| − |(29.3 − 15.6)|| = 4.6).

The number of adult cattle in scenarios 13-18 is 29, as is shown in Figures 5.27 to
166

5.32 (pages 160 to 165). The area of cropland in these scenarios ranges from 107 to
207 ha. Thus, if the adult cattle were being utilised for traction, there would be from
3.7 to 7.2 ha of land for every adult member of the herd.
The contribution of dairy to the overall diet for Scenarios 15, 16, 17, 18 is 10%,
10%, 19%, 19% leaving plants responsible for supplying 70%, 70%, 61%, 61% of the
overall diet.
The catchment area created from this low population estimate would have had
a very limited impact on the landscape, similar to the situation in Scenarios 1 to 6
(Figure 5.19 on page 149). The crop land and the grazing land was likely more widely
spread out but is still easily encompassed in the locality. There is an area of crop land
starting to reach into the hills to the east which, once again will provide an idea area
for the cultivation of olive crops.
The effect of animal foddering is beginning to more noticeably affect the crop land
to grazing land ratio. When the animals are not fed, as in Figures 5.33d,5.33e and
5.33f, the area of grazing land in comparison to the area of crop land is much greater
than in Figures 5.33a,5.33b and 5.33c, where they are foddered.

167

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

80.00%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
825
412

Crops

394200
196999
591,199

Animals

108,405

Crops Human
Crops Animal

0

Max. Mcals Dairy
Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

126,477
139,053
12,576 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

72.87%
13.28%
5.42%
8.44%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

90%

Crop Contribution

1500

1,313

1313

1,125

1125

938

938

0%

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit
ALL Meat %

100%
20%
days

90

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

8%

20%

20%
0%
410

80%

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

750

750

563

563

Dairy
Crops

108405

Dairy

1095

Crops

80
375

394200

Wild Plants

22
3

372

0

Wild Meat

14

375

43800
0

100,000

200,000

300,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

400,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

188

188
414

229

1,500

3.00

1,125

2.00

375
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

750
1.00
0

653

72%

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

1,500

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

1,237
1,134

123
Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

43
9

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.34: Scenario19:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 20%, Potential Dairy Utilisation = 0%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

168

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

80.00%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
843
0

Crops

394200
0
394,200

Animals

108,405

Crops Human
Crops Animal

0

Max. Mcals Dairy
Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
55,131
55,131 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

90.94%
9.06%
0.00%
0.00%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

0%

ALL Meat %

20%

8%

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

1,500

900

1,313

788

100%

days

0

259

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

20%

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

843
1,416

1,125

516

675

20%
0%

563

938
22
3

80%

80

72%

450

750

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

14

Dairy
Crops
464

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

108405

Dairy

0

Wild Meat

1095

Crops

225

375

394200

Wild Plants

414

43800
0

100,000

200,000

300,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

400,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

280

188

113

0

0

1,500

3.00

1,125

2.00

750
1.00
0

338

563

155

375
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

43
9

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.35: Scenario20:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 20%, Potential Dairy Utilisation = 0%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

169

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

70.49%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
726
412

Crops

347349
196999
544,348

Animals

108,405

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

52,057

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

126,477
132,500
6,024 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

73.94%
12.20%
5.42%
8.44%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

90%

Crop Contribution

ALL Meat %
Supplemental feed

1500

1,313

1313

1,125

1125

938

938

50%
100%
20%
days

90

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

7%

10%

20%

20%

10%
0%
70%

416

63%
750

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

108405

Dairy

52057

Wild Meat

1095

Crops

377
375

100,000

200,000

300,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

375

400,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

188

188
232

1,500

3.00

365

1,125

2.00

375
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

750
1.00
0

19
3
70
13

38594
0

750

563

563

347349

Wild Plants

622

Dairy
Crops

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat
Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

1,500

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

1,137
1,151

125
Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

38
8

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.36: Scenario21:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 20%, Potential Dairy Utilisation = 50%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

170

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

70.49%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
743
0

Crops

347349
0
347,349

Animals

108,405

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

52,057

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
48,579
48,579 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

92.01%
7.99%
0.00%
0.00%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit

50%

ALL Meat %

20%

7%

days

0

1,500

800

1,313

700

522

99%

1,125

228

500

938

10%
0%

19
3

63%

70
400

750

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

13

Dairy
Crops
470

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
!

600

20%

20%
70%

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

100%

Domestic Animal Contribution

10%

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

743
1,432

300

563

108405
Dairy

52057

Wild Meat

1095

Crops
Wild Plants

365

38594
0

100,000

200,000

300,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

400,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

284

188

100

0

0

1,500

3.00

1,125

2.00

750
1.00
0

200

375

347349

157

375
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

38
8

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.37: Scenario22:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 20%, Potential Dairy Utilisation = 50%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

171

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

60.98%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
626
411

Crops

300498
196999
497,498

Animals

108,405

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

104,113

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

126,477
125,948
529 Deficit

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

75.02%
11.13%
5.42%
8.44%

Sheep
Cow
Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna
Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

ALL Meat %

61%

108405
104113

Wild Meat

938

19%

750

750

0%

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Dairy
Crops

591

383

100,000

16
2
61
11

200,000

300,000

400,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

316

1,125

2.00

375

Adults

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

750
1.00

188

188
236

1,500

3.00

Pig

375

375

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

Sheep

563

563

33389
0

0

938
422

300498

Wild Plants

1125

99%

1095

Crops

1,125

days

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet

Dairy

1313

20%

55%

Meat Mcal

Domestic Meat

1,313

20%
90

Domestic Animal Contribution

6%

Plants Mcal
Dairy

1500

Dairy Utilisation 100%
100%
Dairy Limit

19%

20%

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

1,500

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

1,037
1,168

127
Sheep Pig

Adults

33
7

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.38: Scenario23:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 20%, Potential Dairy Utilisation = 100%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

172

912.5

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

547,500

City Mcals Year-1

60.98%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
643
0

Crops

300498
0
300,498

Animals

108,405

Crops Human
Crops Animal

Max. Mcals Dairy

104,113

Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

0
42,026
42,026 kg Surplus

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

93.09%
6.91%
0.00%
0.00%

Sheep
Cow

Maximum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

1,500

700

1,313

613

Dairy Utilisation 100%
100%
Dairy Limit
ALL Meat %

20%
days

0

6%

528

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

19%

1,125

197

61%

438
16
2

19%

55%

0%

61
350

750

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

11

Dairy
Crops
475

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

108405

Dairy

104113

Wild Meat

316

33389
0

100,000

200,000

300,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

400,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

287

188

88

0

0

1,500

3.00

1,125

2.00

750
1.00
0

175

375

300498

Wild Plants

263

563

1095

Crops

525

20%
938

20%

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

90%

Crop Contribution

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
600
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

643
1,449

159

375
Sheep

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

33
7

Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.39: Scenario24:Chalcolithic, Maximum Population (600), Meat Portion 20%, Potential Dairy Utilisation = 100%, No animals are fed supplementary feed

173

(a) Scenario 19 - Meat 20%
Max. Population 600
Foddered, Dairy 0%

(b) Scenario 21 - Meat 20%
Max. Population 600
Foddered, Dairy 50%

(c) Scenario 23 - Meat 20%
Max. Population 600
Foddered, Dairy 100%

(d) Scenario 20 - Meat 20%
Max. Population 600
Not Foddered, Dairy 0%

(e) Scenario 22 - Meat 20%
Max. Population 600
Not Foddered, Dairy 50%

(f) Scenario 24 - Meat 20%
Max. Population 600
Not Foddered, Dairy 100%

Figure 5.40: Set 4: Maximum Population, Meat 20%, Chalcolithic Comparison between
results looking at the difference supplemental feeding of animals makes. Dark green represents
crop land, light green grazing land.
(a) Crop (extent=58.6 minutes, area=1237 Ha),Grazing (extent=78.8 minutes,area=1134 Ha)
(b) Crop (extent=56 minutes, area=1137 Ha),Grazing (extent=77.5 minutes, area=1151 Ha)
(c) Crop (extent=53.4 minutes, area=1037 Ha),Grazing (extent=75.5 minutes, area=1168 Ha)
(d) Crop (extent=48.2 minutes, area=843 Ha), Grazing (extent=76.8 minutes, area=1416 Ha)
(e) Crop (extent=44.3 minutes, area=743 Ha), Grazing (extent=75.5 minutes, area=1432 Ha)
(f) Crop (extent=41.7 minutes, area=643 Ha), Grazing (extent=74.2 minutes, area=1449 Ha)

Set 4 (Figure 5.40) considers the effect of animal foddering for a maximum population of 600 people, for a 20% meat level and dairy levels of 0%, 50% and 100%.
Scenarios 19, 21 and 23 are assuming the animals were foddered; Scenarios 20, 22 and
24 are assuming the animals were not foddered. Minimal variance in footprint size is
evident. There is a visible disparity in the crop land to grazing land ratio. The grazing
land area needed increases from [1134, 1151, 1168] ha to [1416, 1432, 1449] ha when animals are not given supplemental feed. The increase of 124.06% (values from Figures
5.40c and 5.40f ❀ 1453
1171 = 124.06%), affects the difference in extent by 10.4 minutes
(values from Figures 5.40c and 5.40f ❀ ||(75.5 − 53.4)| − |(74.2 − 41.7)|| = 10.4).

The number of adult cattle in scenarios 19-24 is 168, as is shown in Figures 5.34 to

5.39 (pages 168 to 173). The area of cropland in these scenarios ranges from 643 to
174

1237 ha. Thus, if the adult cattle were being utilised for traction, there would be from
3.8 to 7.4 ha of land for every adult member of the herd.
The contribution of dairy to the overall diet for Scenarios 21, 22, 23, 24 is 10%,
10%, 19%, 19% leaving plants responsible for supplying 70%, 70%, 61%, 61% of the
overall diet.
Scenarios 19-24 all have wide ranging pastures extending into the hills to the east.
Noticeably, the area of land to be cultivated for the growth of crops is still largely
contained in the valley, but land designated on the slopes would have presumably been
used for olives. Given the possibility that not all land immediately proximate to the
settlement was being used in a perfectly efficient manner, it is likely that the Shuna
population was beginning to operate over much of this NE corner of the Jordan valley
between the Jordan and Yarmouk rivers. A sustainable (Chalcolithic) settlement, at
this location, with a population approaching such maxima is plausible with any of
these scenarios.

175

Mcals Person-1 Year-1

912.5

City Mcals Year-1

91,250
70.00%

Overall Plant Contribution

MCals

Area (Ha)
119
103

Crops

57488
49637
107,125

Animals

27,101

Crops Human
Crops Animal

0

Max. Mcals Dairy
Straw/Chaff Asked For
Straw/Chaff Available
Fodder Status

31,912
29,185
2,727 Deficit

Animal Feed Composition
Grazing Land
Fallow Land
Straw/Chaff
Grain

76.64%
9.48%
5.43%
8.45%

Sheep
Cow

Minimum Population
MCals Person-1 Day-1
Crop Selection
Horse Bean
Einkorn
Emmer
Lentils
Peas
Olives
Grapes
Grass Peas
Bitter Vetch
Barley
FreeHull Barley

90%

Crop Contribution

300

350

263

300

225

250

188

0%

Dairy Utilisation
Dairy Limit
ALL Meat %

Einkorn
Lentils
Olives
Barley

3.59%
36.65%
47.81%
11.95%

Sheep
Pig
Cow
Goat

Supplemental feed

Horse Bean
Emmer
Peas
Bitter Vetch

400

Animal Selection

1.09%
5.47%
52.52%
1.09%
3.28%
1.53%
2.19%
32.83%

Pig
Goat

Chalcolithic
100
2.500

Settlement: Shuna

222
300

100%
30%
days

90

99%

Domestic Animal Contribution

7%
30%

30%

0%
70%

108

63%
150

200

Plants Mcal
Dairy

Domestic Meat
Wild Meat
Wild Plants

Meat Mcal

137

Dairy
Crops

Mcalorie Contributions to the Overall Diet
Domestic Meat

27101

Dairy

0

Wild Meat

99

274

Crops

3
0
12
2

6388
0

15,000

30,000

45,000

Mcalories Supplied
Animals per Hectare

60,000

Surplus Dairy
Herd Sizes

60

225

2.00

75

Adults

Pig

Cow

Goat

Offspring

0

0

0

150
1.00

38

50
61

300

3.00

Sheep

75

100

57488

Wild Plants

0

113

150

33
Sheep Pig

Adults

Cow Goat

Hectares Grazing Land

Offspring

6
1

Hectares Crop Land

Figure 5.41: Scenario25:Chalcolithic, Minimum Population (100), Meat Portion 30%, Potential
Dairy Utilisation = 0%, Gestating animals are fed supplementary feed for 90 days

176

